[SOURCE URL] https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/S4_Guideline.pdf
[CHARS] 5033

INTERNATIONAL 	CONFERENCE 	ON 	HARMONISATION 	OF 	TECHNICAL
REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN
USE
ICH HARMONISED TRIPARTITE G UIDELINE
DURATION OF CHRONIC TOXICITY TESTING IN A NIMALS
(R ODENT AND NON R ODENT TOXICITY TESTING)
S4
Current Step 4 version
dated 2 September 1998
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and
has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH
Process. 	At Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the
regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan and USA.

-- 1 of 4 --

S4
Document History
First
Codification History 	Date
New
Codification
November
2005
S4A 	Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2
and release for public consultation.
16
July
1997
S4
Current Step 4 version
S4 	Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and
recommendation 	for 	adoption 	to 	the 	three 	ICH
regulatory bodies.
2
September
1998
S4

-- 2 of 4 --

DURATION OF CHRONIC TOXICITY TESTING IN A NIMALS
(R ODENT AND NON R ODENT TOXICITY TESTING)
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline
Having reached Step 4 of the ICH Process at the ICH Steering Committee meeting
on 2 September 1998, this guideline is recommended for
adoption to the three regulatory parties to ICH
1. 	O BJECTIVE
The objective of this guidance is to set out the considerations that apply to chronic
toxicity testing in rodents and non rodents as part of the safety evaluation of a
medicinal product. 	Since guidance is not legally binding, an applicant may submit
justification for an alternative approach.
2. 	SCOPE
This guidance has been prepared for the development of medicinal products with the
exception of those already covered by the ICH Guideline on Safety Studies for
Biotechnological Products, e.g., Monoclonal antibodies, recombinant DNA proteins.
3. 	B ACKGROUND
During the first International Conference on Harmonisation in 1991, the practices for
the testing of chronic toxicity in the 3 regions (EU, Japan, and US) had been
reviewed. 	Arising from this it emerged that there was a scientific consensus on the
approach for chronic testing in rodents, supporting the harmonised duration of testing
of 6 months. However, for chronic toxicity testing in non-rodents, there were different
approaches to the duration of testing.
The lack of harmonised duration led to the need for pharmaceutical companies to
perform partially duplicative studies for both 6 and 12 months duration when
developing new medicinal products. As the objective of ICH is to reduce or eliminate
the need to duplicate testing during development of medicinal products and to ensure
a more economical use of material, animal and human resources, while at the same
time maintaining safeguards to protect public health, further scientific evaluation
was undertaken.
Each of the regulatory authorities in EU, Japan and US undertook a review to
determine whether a single duration for chronic toxicity testing in non-rodents could
be identified. 	From this analysis it emerged that in 16 cases a more detailed
evaluation of 6 versus 12 months data should be undertaken.
This evaluation was conducted as a joint exercise by the competent authorities in the
3 regions.
In some of the cases analysed at the tripartite meetings, there were no additional
findings at 12 months. 	For some other cases, there was not complete agreement
among the regulators with respect to the comparability in study design and conduct to
allow assessment of whether there were differences in the findings at 6 and 12
months due to duration of treatment alone.
In a number of cases there were findings observed by 12 months, but not by 6 months.
It was concluded that these would, or could have been detected in a study of nine
months duration. 	Varying degrees of concern for the differences in findings detected
1

-- 3 of 4 --

Duration of Chronic Toxicity Testing in Animals
between the studies of different durations were expressed. 	An agreement on the
clinical relevance of these findings could not be reached.
Studies of 12 months duration are usually not necessary and studies of shorter than 9
months duration may be sufficient.
In the EU, studies of 6 months duration in non-rodents are acceptable according to
Council Directive 75/318/EEC, as amended. To avoid duplication, where studies with
a longer duration have been conducted, it would not be necessary to conduct a study of
6 months.
4. 	G UIDANCE ON DURATION OF CHRONIC TOXICITY TESTING FOR TRIPARTITE
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Arising from the extensive analysis and review of the above mentioned data in non-
rodents and based upon the achievements of ICH1 for testing in rodents, and so as to
avoid duplication and follow a single development plan for chronic toxicity testing of
new 	medicinal 	products, 	the 	following 	studies 	are 	considered 	acceptable 	for
submission in the 3 Regions:
1) Rodents:
a study of 6 months duration;
2) Non-rodents:
a study of nine months duration.
2

-- 4 of 4 --

