[SOURCE URL] https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/S10_Guideline.pdf
[CHARS] 48984

i
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON HARMONISATION OF TECHNICAL
REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE
ICH HARMONISED TRIPARTITE GUIDELINE
PHOTOSAFETY EVALUATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS
S10
Current
Step 4 version
dated 13 November 2013
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and
has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH
Process. At Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the
regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan and USA.

-- 1 of 19 --

S10
Document History
Code History Date
S10 Approval by the Steering Committee under
Step 2 and release
for public consultation.
15 November
2012
Current
Step 4 version
S10 Approval by the Steering Committee under
Step 4 and
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory bodies.
13 November
2013
Legal Notice: This document is protected by copyright and may be used, reproduced, incorporated
into other works, adapted, modified, translated or distributed under a public license provided that
ICH's copyright in the document is acknowledged at all times. In case of any adaption,
modification or translation of the document, reasonable steps must be taken to clearly label,
demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to or based on the original document.
Any impression that the adaption, modification or translation of the original document is endorsed
or sponsored by the ICH must be avoided.
The document is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind. In no event shall the ICH or the
authors of the original document be liable for any claim, damages or other liability arising from
the use of the document.
The above-mentioned permissions do not apply to content supplied by third parties. Therefore, for
documents where the copyright vests in a third party, permission for reproduction must be
obtained from this copyright holder.

-- 2 of 19 --

i
PHOTOSAFETY EVALUATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline
Having reached
Step 4 of the ICH Process at the ICH Steering Committee meeting on 13
November 2013 this guideline is recommended for adoption to the three regulatory
parties to ICH.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION ...........................................................................................................1
1.1. Objectives of the Guideline .......................................................................................... 1
1.2. Background .................................................................................................................. 1
1.3. Scope of the Guideline .................................................................................................. 1
1.4. General Principles ........................................................................................................ 2
2. FACTORS TO CONSIDER IN THE PHOTOSAFETY EVALUATION .........................................2
2.1. Photochemical Properties ............................................................................................ 2
2.2. Tissue Distribution/Pharmacokinetics ........................................................................ 3
2.3. Metabolite Considerations ........................................................................................... 4
2.4. Pharmacological Properties ......................................................................................... 4
3. NONCLINICAL PHOTOSAFETY TESTS ............................................................................4
3.1. General Considerations................................................................................................ 4
3.2. Photoreactivity Tests Using Chemical Assays ............................................................ 5
3.3. Phototoxicity Tests Using
in vitro Assays ................................................................... 5
3.4. Photosafety Tests Using
in vivo Assays and Systemic Administration...................... 6
3.5. Photosafety Tests Using
in vivo Assays and Dermal Administration ........................ 7
4. CLINICAL PHOTOSAFETY ASSESSMENT ........................................................................7
5. ASSESSMENT STRATEGIES ...........................................................................................7
5.1. Recommendations for Pharmaceuticals Given
via Systemic Routes .......................... 9
5.1.1 Assessment of Phototoxicity Potential............................................................... 9
5.1.2 Experimental Evaluation of Phototoxicity ........................................................ 9
5.2. Recommendations for Pharmaceuticals Given
via Dermal Routes .......................... 10
5.2.1 Assessment of Phototoxicity Potential............................................................. 10
5.2.2 Experimental Evaluation of Phototoxicity and Photoallergy.......................... 10
6. ENDNOTES ................................................................................................................ 11
7. GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................. 13
8. REFERENCES............................................................................................................. 15

-- 3 of 19 --



-- 4 of 19 --

1
PHOTOSAFETY EVALUATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Objectives of the Guideline
The purpose of this document is to recommend international standards for photosafety
assessment, and to harmonise such assessments supporting human clinical trials and
marketing authorizations for pharmaceuticals. It includes factors for initiation of and
triggers for additional photosafety assessment and should be read in conjunction with
ICH M3(R2), Section 14 on Photosafety Testing (Ref. 1). This guideline should reduce
the likelihood that substantial differences in recommendations for photosafety
assessment will exist among regions.
This guideline is divided into several sections. Section 2 discusses factors to consider in
any evaluation of photosafety. Section 3 describes existing nonclinical photosafety tests,
but this section does not describe specific testing strategies. Section 4 mentions clinical
photosafety assessment. Section 5 provides strategies for determining how to assess
photosafety for drugs given by routes intended to produce systemic exposure or by the
dermal route using the considerations and tests described in Sections 2, 3 and 4.
Consideration should be given to the use of non-animal methods or clinical data for
photosafety assessment which could reduce the use of animals in accordance with the 3R
(Replacement/Reduction/Refinement) principles.
1.2. Background
The ICH M3(R2) Guideline provides certain information regarding timing of the
photosafety assessment relative to clinical development. It recommends that an initial
assessment of phototoxicity potential be conducted, and if appropriate, an experimental
evaluation be undertaken before exposure of large numbers of subjects (Phase 3).
Similarly, the ICH S9 Guideline (Ref. 2) describes the timing of photosafety testing for
oncology products. However, neither ICH M3(R2) nor ICH S9 provides specific
information regarding testing strategies. This ICH S10 Guideline outlines further
details on when photosafety testing is warranted, and on possible assessment strategies.
1.3. Scope of the Guideline
This guideline generally applies to new Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs), new
excipients clinical formulations for dermal application (including dermal patches), and
photodynamic therapy products.
Specific guidance for pharmaceuticals given
via ocular routes is not provided because the
reliability of
in vitro approaches in predicting ocular phototoxicity is unknown and there
are no standardised
	in vivo approaches for assessing phototoxicity for products
administered
via the ocular routes (see Note 1).
Photodynamic therapy drugs are developed with photochemical reactivity as an inherent
aspect of their intended pharmacology and additional assessment of their phototoxicity is
not usually warranted. However, an evaluation of the toxicokinetics and tissue
distribution of photodynamic therapy drugs is warranted to enable appropriate risk
management in patients.
This guideline does not generally apply to peptides, proteins, antibody drug conjugates, or
oligonucleotides. Further, this guideline does not apply to components of marketed

-- 5 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
2
products unless there is a new cause for concern for either the API or an excipient (e.g., a
reformulation from a tablet to a topical cream).
1.4. General Principles
The photosafety assessment of a pharmaceutical is an integrated process that can involve
an evaluation of photochemical characteristics, data from nonclinical studies and human
safety information. The photosafety assessment aims to determine whether risk
minimization measures are warranted to prevent adverse events in humans.
Four different effects have been discussed in connection with photosafety testing:
phototoxicity, photoallergy, photogenotoxicity and photocarcinogenicity. Testing for
photogenotoxicity (Note 2) and photocarcinogenicity (Note 6 of ICH M3 (R2)) is not
currently considered useful for human pharmaceuticals. This guideline addresses only
phototoxicity and photoallergy effects as defined below:
 Phototoxicity (photoirritation): An acute light-induced tissue response to a
photoreactive chemical.
 Photoallergy: An immunologically mediated reaction to a chemical, initiated by
the formation of photoproducts (e.g., protein adducts) following a photochemical
reaction.
Photosensitization is a general term occasionally used to describe all light-induced tissue
reactions. However, in order to clearly distinguish between photoallergy and
phototoxicity, the term photosensitization is not used in this guideline.
For a chemical to demonstrate phototoxicity and/or photoallergy, the following
characteristics are critical:
 Absorbs light within the range of natural sunlight (290-700 nm);
 Generates a reactive species following absorption of UV-visible light;
 Distributes sufficiently to light-exposed tissues (e.g., skin, eye).
If one or more of these conditions is not met, a compound will usually not present a
concern for direct phototoxicity. However, increased sensitivity of skin to light can also
occur through indirect mechanisms. Such mechanisms are not generally addressed by
the testing outlined in this guideline (see also Section 2.4).
2. FACTORS TO CONSIDER IN THE PHOTOSAFETY EVALUATION
2.1. Photochemical Properties
The initial consideration for assessment of photoreactive potential is whether a compound
absorbs photons at any wavelength between 290 and 700 nm. A compound that does not
have a Molar Extinction Coefficient (MEC) greater than 1000 L mol-1 cm-1 at any
wavelength between 290 and 700 nm (Ref. 3) is not considered to be sufficiently
photoreactive to result in direct phototoxicity (see Note 3 for further details).
Excitation of molecules by light can lead to generation of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS),
including superoxide anion and singlet oxygen
	via energy transfer mechanisms.
Although photoreactivity can result in other molecular outcomes (e.g., formation of
photoadducts or cytotoxic photoproducts), even in these cases, it appears that ROS are
typically generated as well. Thus, ROS generation following irradiation with UV-visible
light can be an indicator of phototoxicity potential.
Photostability testing (Ref. 4) can also suggest the potential for photoreactivity.
However, not all photoreactive compounds are detected under these conditions, and

-- 6 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
3
photodegradation
per se does not imply that a drug will be phototoxic. Therefore,
photostability testing alone should not be used to determine whether further photosafety
evaluation is warranted.
Assessments of photochemical properties should be conducted using high-quality
scientific standards with data collection records readily available, or in compliance with
Good Laboratory Practices/Good Manufacturing Practices (GLP/GMP) regulations.
2.2. Tissue Distribution/Pharmacokinetics
The concentration of a photoreactive chemical in tissue at the time of light exposure is a
very important pharmacokinetic parameter in determining whether a phototoxic reaction
will occur. This concentration depends on a variety of factors, such as plasma
concentration, perfusion of the tissue, partitioning from vascular to interstitial and
cellular compartments, and binding, retention, and accumulation of the chemical in the
tissue. The duration of exposure depends upon clearance rates as reflected by half lives
in plasma and tissue. Collectively, these parameters define the mean residence time of
the photoreactive chemical in tissue.
Binding, retention, or accumulation of a compound in a tissue is not critical for a
phototoxic reaction. If a molecule is sufficiently photoreactive, it might produce a
phototoxic reaction at the concentration achieved in plasma or interstitial fluid.
However, compounds having longer half-lives in plasma, longer mean residence time in
sun-exposed tissues or with higher tissue to plasma concentration ratios are more likely
to produce a phototoxic reaction than compounds with shorter half-lives, residence times
or lower tissue to plasma ratios. Further, the longer the concentration of a compound is
maintained at a level above that critical for a photochemical reaction, the longer a person
is at risk for phototoxicity.
Although a tissue concentration threshold below which the risk for phototoxic reactions
would be negligible is scientifically plausible, there are currently no data to delineate
such generic thresholds for all compounds. Nevertheless, on a case-by-case basis it can
be possible to justify that further photosafety assessment is not warranted based upon
actual or anticipated tissue drug levels in humans, and taking into consideration the
factors discussed above. Examples could include: 1) a drug for which overall systemic
exposure levels are very low, or 2) a drug with a very short plasma half-life or tissue
residence.
Compound binding to tissue components (e.g., melanin, keratin) is one mechanism by
which tissue retention and/or accumulation can occur. Although melanin binding can
increase tissue levels, experience with melanin binding drugs suggests such binding alone
does not present a photosafety concern.
A single-dose tissue distribution study, with animals assessed at multiple timepoints
after dosing, will generally provide an adequate assessment of relative tissue to plasma
concentration ratios, tissue residence time and the potential for retention and
accumulation. Assessment time points should be appropriately spaced in such a study to
account for the drug half-life.
Compounds activated by visible light and exhibiting long elimination half-lives in
internal tissues have been demonstrated to cause injury to those tissues if exposed to
intense light during medical procedures. Consequently, for those compounds activated
by visible light with potent
in vivo phototoxicity or known to be phototoxic based on their
mechanism of action, such as photodynamic therapy drugs, distribution to internal
tissues should be measured and tissue-specific half-lives estimated. Drugs that only
absorb UV light or have short tissue elimination half-lives are not likely to present a risk
to internal tissues even if they are known to be photoreactive.

-- 7 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
4
2.3. Metabolite Considerations
Metabolites generally do not warrant separate photosafety assessments, as metabolism
does not typically result in chromophores that are substantially different from those in
the parent molecule.
2.4. Pharmacological Properties
In many cases, drug-induced phototoxicity is due to the chemical structure and not to the
pharmacology. However, certain pharmacologic properties (e.g., immunosuppression,
perturbation of heme homeostasis) can enhance susceptibility to light-induced effects,
such as skin irritation or UV-induced skin tumor formation. The testing strategies
outlined in this document are not designed to detect these types of indirect mechanisms.
Some of these indirect mechanisms can be identified and evaluated in other nonclinical
pharmacology/toxicity testing; however, phototoxicity related to other indirect
mechanisms might only become apparent with human experience.
3. NONCLINICAL PHOTOSAFETY TESTS
3.1. General Considerations
Carefully selected conditions that consider both the model system and exposure to a
relevant radiation spectrum are critical for nonclinical photosafety testing. Ideally, a
nonclinical assay should exhibit both high sensitivity and specificity (i.e., low false
negative and low false positive rates). However, to support the assessment strategies
described in this document, it is most important that nonclinical photosafety assays show
high sensitivity resulting in a low frequency of false negatives (i.e., a high negative
predictive value). This is because negative assay results usually do not warrant further
photosafety evaluation. The available nonclinical assays, both
in vitro and
in vivo, are
focused primarily on detecting potential phototoxicity, which might or might not translate
into clinically relevant phototoxicity.
Selection of irradiation conditions is critical for both
in vitro and
in vivo assays. Natural
sunlight represents the broadest range of light exposure that humans might be exposed to
regularly. However, sunlight
per se is not well defined and depends on many factors,
such as latitude, altitude, season, time of day, and weather. In addition, sensitivity of
human skin to natural sunlight depends on a number of individual factors (e.g., skin type,
anatomical site and tanning status). Standardized sunlight exposure conditions have
been defined by various organizations. Such standards (e.g., Ref. 5) should be
considered in order to assess suitability of a sunlight simulator light source, and
irradiance and irradiation dose should be normalized based on the UVA part of the
applied spectrum. UVA doses ranging from 5 to 20 J/cm2 are successfully used in
current
in vitro and
in vivo phototoxicity assays. These UVA doses are comparable to
those obtained during prolonged outdoor activities on summer days around noon time, in
temperate zones, and at sea level. In humans, sunburn reactions caused by UVB
normally limit total sunlight exposure. In nonclinical phototoxicity assays, however, the
amount of UVB should not limit the overall irradiation and might be attenuated
(partially filtered) so that relevant UVA doses can be tested without reducing assay
sensitivity. Penetration of UVB light into human skin is mainly limited to the
epidermis, while UVA can reach capillary blood. Therefore, clinical relevance of
photochemical activation by UVB is considered less important than activation by UVA for
systemic drugs. However, UVB irradiation is relevant for topical formulations applied to
light-exposed tissues.

-- 8 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
5
The selection and monitoring of appropriate light sources (spectral distribution,
irradiance, and dose) and the procedures used should be clearly described in the study
methodology (e.g., Ref. 6).
3.2. Photoreactivity Tests Using Chemical Assays
If a drug developer chooses to assess photoreactivity, the assay should be qualified using
pharmaceutical agents under appropriate conditions to demonstrate assay sensitivity.
One such assay is a ROS assay (e.g., Ref. 7). Data suggest that this assay has high
sensitivity for predicting direct
in vivo phototoxicants. However, it has a low specificity,
generating a high percentage of false positive results. A negative result in this assay,
conducted under the appropriate conditions, would indicate a very low probability of
phototoxicity, provided a test concentration of 200 μM can be achieved, whereas a positive
result (at any concentration) would only be a flag for follow-up assessment.
3.3. Phototoxicity Tests Using
in vitro Assays
A number of
in vitro assays have been developed for assessing the phototoxicity potential
of chemicals. Some of these assays have not been qualified for use with
pharmaceuticals. Some assays involve testing compounds that are dissolved in the
culture medium, and such methods are often appropriate for the active ingredient or
excipients in drug products, depending on their solubility. Other assays involve direct
application to the surface of a tissue preparation and can be appropriate for testing entire
formulations intended to be administered topically.
The most widely used
in vitro assay for phototoxicity is the 3T3 Neutral Red Uptake
Phototoxicity Test (3T3 NRU-PT) for which an Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) guideline (Ref. 6) is available. This is currently considered
the most appropriate
in vitro screen for soluble compounds.
Although the formal European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods
(ECVAM) validation exercise conducted on this assay indicated a sensitivity of 93% and a
specificity of 84%, experience within the pharmaceutical industry suggests a much lower
specificity. The original OECD protocol was not validated for pharmaceuticals
specifically. Thus, some modifications to the original OECD protocol have been proposed
to address the low specificity observed with drug substances (see Note 4). These
proposed changes are appropriate for the testing of pharmaceuticals. The sensitivity of
the 3T3 NRU-PT is high and if a compound is negative in this assay it would have a very
low probability of being phototoxic in humans. However, a positive result in the 3T3
NRU-PT should not be regarded as indicative of a likely clinical phototoxic risk, but
rather a flag for follow-up assessment.
The BALB/c 3T3 cell line is sensitive to UVB and the initially recommended irradiation
conditions (Ref. 6) involve the use of filters to attenuate wavelengths below 320 nm.
However, depending on the light source and filters used, the ratio of UVB to UVA can be
adjusted such that it is possible to assess UVB-induced phototoxicity in this test.
UVB-induced phototoxicity is rarely a problem for pharmaceuticals with systemic
exposure since UVB minimally penetrates beyond the epidermis. However,
UVB-induced phototoxicity is more relevant for topical products. For components of
topically applied products that absorb predominately in the UVB range, and where
in
vitro assessment is desired, the use of the 3T3 NRU-PT with modified irradiation
conditions (see above) can be considered. Alternatively,
in vitro skin models, which
better tolerate UVB, could be considered.
Reconstructed human skin models, with the presence of a stratum corneum, permit
testing of various types of topically applied materials ranging from neat chemicals to final

-- 9 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
6
clinical formulations. The assays developed with reconstructed human skin to date
measure cell viability with and without irradiation. These assays appear to be capable
of detecting known human acute dermal phototoxicants. However, the sensitivity of
some assays can be less than that of human skin
	in vivo, wherein the lowest
concentration eliciting a positive response can be higher than in human skin
in vivo.
Consequently, it is important to understand the sensitivity of any assay selected and, if
appropriate and feasible, to adjust the assay conditions accordingly (e.g., testing higher
strength formulations, increasing exposure time).
There are no
in vitro models that specifically assess ocular phototoxicity, regardless of the
route of administration. While negative results in the 3T3 NRU-PT or a reconstructed
human skin assay might suggest a low risk, the predictive value of these assays for ocular
phototoxicity is unknown.
3.4. Photosafety Tests Using
in vivo Assays and Systemic Administration
Phototoxicity testing for systemically administered compounds has been conducted in a
variety of species, including guinea pig, mouse, and rat. No standardized study design
has been established and thus the following factors might be considered as best practices.
For species selection, irradiation sensitivity (i.e., minimal erythema dose), heat tolerance,
and performance of reference substances should be considered. Models with both
pigmented and non-pigmented animals are available. Although non-pigmented skin
tends to be more sensitive than pigmented skin for detecting phototoxicity, pigmented
skin should be considered for APIs that bind significantly to melanin (see Section 2.2) if
appropriate exposures in target tissues cannot be ensured otherwise.
If an
in vivo phototoxicity study is conducted, it is desirable to have some information
about the pharmacokinetic profile of the compound before designing the study. This is to
ensure that irradiation of the animals is conducted at the approximate Tmax and to assist
in the selection of an appropriate study duration in relation to the intended clinical
exposure. Relevant pharmacokinetic data, if not already available, should be collected
as part of the
in vivo phototoxicity study.
Although phototoxicity is typically an acute reaction, the duration of an
in vivo assay
should be carefully considered. Accumulation of compound in relevant light-exposed
tissues after repeated administration might lead to an increased phototoxic response.
Similarly, repeated irradiation after each dose might also lead to an increased phototoxic
response due to the accumulation of damage. Generally, studies of a single day or up to
a few days’ duration of dosing are appropriate, using the clinical route of administration,
if feasible. Single or repeated daily irradiations after dosing (around Tmax) can be used.
Dose selection for
in vivo nonclinical phototoxicity testing of systemic drugs should
support a meaningful human risk assessment. For such studies a maximum dose level
that complies with the recommendations for general toxicity studies in ICH M3(R2)
Section 1.5 is considered appropriate. If a negative result is obtained at the maximum
dose, testing of lower doses is usually not warranted. However, if a positive result is
anticipated, additional dose groups can support a NOAEL-based risk assessment,
typically considering Cmax comparisons. Vehicle and non-irradiated controls can help
identify compound-related phototoxicity and distinguish irradiation-induced from
non-irradiation-induced adverse reactions. If the maximum systemic exposure achieved
in animals is lower than clinical exposure, the reliability of a negative result in predicting
human risk is questionable.
The most sensitive early signs of compound-induced phototoxicity are usually erythema
followed by edema at a normally sub-erythemogenic irradiation dose. The type of
response might vary with the compound. Any identified phototoxicity reaction should be

-- 10 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
7
evaluated regarding dose and time dependency and, if possible, the No Observed Adverse
Effect Level (NOAEL) should be established. The hazard identification might be further
supported by additional endpoints (e.g., early inflammatory markers in skin or lymph
node reactions indicative of acute irritation).
If a phototoxicity study is conducted in animals for a systemic drug that absorbs light
above 400 nm, phototoxicity of the retina should be assessed using a detailed
histopathological evaluation. For compounds that only absorb light below 400 nm,
retinal assessment is usually not warranted because such wavelengths do not reach the
retina of the adult human eye due to limited penetration of the cornea, lens and vitreous
body.
Adequate performance of
in vivo phototoxicity assays, which are not formally validated,
should be demonstrated using suitable reference compounds, including pharmaceuticals.
Compounds that are phototoxic in humans and that represent different chemical classes
and mechanisms of phototoxicity should be included to establish adequacy of the assays.
For retinal phototoxicity, a reference compound with a light absorption profile within the
visible light range (i.e., above 400 nm) is recommended. The concurrent use of a positive
control compound might not be warranted if an
in vivo assay has been formally validated
or has reached general acceptance and is established in the testing facility.
Testing for photoallergy is not recommended for compounds that are administered
systemically. Photoallergy reactions in humans following systemic administration are
rare and there are no established nonclinical photoallergy assays for systemically
administered compounds.
3.5. Photosafety Tests Using
in vivo Assays and Dermal Administration
The main recommendations provided for investigating the systemic route of
administration also apply to dermal administration, including those for species selection,
study duration, and irradiation conditions. For dermal drug products in general, the
clinical formulation should be tested. The intended clinical conditions of administration
should be used to the extent possible. Irradiation of the exposed area should take place
at a specified time after application, and the interval between application and irradiation
should be justified based on the specific properties of the formulation to be tested. Signs
of phototoxicity should be assessed based on relevant endpoints (see Section 3.4). The
sensitivity of the assay should be demonstrated using appropriate reference compounds.
Assessment of systemic drug levels is generally not warranted in dermal phototoxicity
studies.
For dermal drug products, contact photoallergy has often been assessed in a nonclinical
study along with acute phototoxicity (photoirritation). However, no formal validation of
such assays has been performed. While the acute photoirritation observed in these
studies is considered relevant to humans, the predictivity of these studies for human
photoallergy is unknown. For regulatory purposes, such nonclinical photoallergy testing
is generally not recommended.
4. CLINICAL PHOTOSAFETY ASSESSMENT
There are various options for collecting human data, if warranted, ranging from standard
reporting of adverse events in clinical studies to a dedicated clinical photosafety trial.
The precise strategy is determined on a case-by-case basis.
5. ASSESSMENT STRATEGIES
The choice of the photosafety assessment strategy is up to the drug developer. ICH
M3(R2) suggests that an initial assessment of the phototoxicity potential based on

-- 11 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
8
photochemical properties and pharmacological/chemical class be undertaken before
outpatient studies. Characterization of the UV-visible absorption spectrum is
recommended as the initial assessment because it can obviate any further photosafety
evaluation. In addition, the distribution to skin and eye can be evaluated to inform
further on the human risk and the recommendations for further testing. Then, if
appropriate, an experimental evaluation of phototoxicity potential (
in vitro or
in vivo, or
clinical) should be undertaken before exposure of large numbers of subjects (Phase 3).
Figure 1 provides an outline of possible phototoxicity assessment strategies. The figure
is based on the strategies outlined in this section of this document. The strategies are
flexible. Depending on the particular situation, some portions of the assessment are
optional and might not be conducted.
Figure 1. Outline of possible phototoxicity assessment strategies for pharmaceuticals
given
via systemic and dermal routes
* “otherwise”: data do not support a low potential for phototoxicity or have not been generated
(assay/test/evaluation not conducted)
# A “negative” result in an appropriately conducted
in vivo phototoxicity study supersedes a
positive
in vitro result. A robust clinical phototoxicity assessment indicating no concern
supersedes any positive nonclinical results. A positive result in an
in vitro phototoxicity test
could also, on a case-by-case basis, be negated by tissue distribution data (see text). In the
United States, for products applied dermally, a dedicated clinical trial for phototoxicity on the
to-be-marketed formulation can be warranted in support of product approval.
$ Clinical evaluation could range from standard reporting of adverse events in clinical studies to
a dedicated clinical photosafety trial.
§ Tissue distribution is not a consideration for the phototoxicity of dermal products.

-- 12 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
9
5.1. Recommendations for Pharmaceuticals Given
via Systemic Routes
5.1.1 Assessment of Phototoxicity Potential
If the substance does not have a MEC greater than 1000 L mol-1 cm-1 (between 290 and
700 nm), no photosafety testing is recommended and no direct phototoxicity is anticipated
in humans. However, it should be noted that phototoxicity by indirect mechanisms (e.g.,
pseudoporphyria or porphyria), although rare, could still occur. For compounds with
MEC values of 1000 L mol-1 cm-1 or higher, if the drug developer chooses to conduct a test
for photoreactivity a negative result could support a decision that no further photosafety
assessment is warranted (see Section 3.2). Otherwise, nonclinical and/or clinical
photosafety assessment of the substance should be conducted. Available data on the
phototoxicity of chemical class-related compounds should be evaluated as this could
inform on the approach to be taken.
5.1.2 Experimental Evaluation of Phototoxicity
In order to reduce the use of animals in accordance with the 3R principles, a validated
in
vitro method should generally be considered before conducting animal testing (e.g., see
Directive 2010/63/EU). If the drug developer chooses an
in vitro approach, the 3T3
NRU-PT is currently the most widely used assay and in many cases could be considered
as an initial test for phototoxicity. The high sensitivity of the 3T3 NRU-PT results in
good negative predictivity, and negative results are generally accepted as sufficient
evidence that a substance is not phototoxic. In such cases no further testing is
recommended and no direct phototoxicity is anticipated in humans.
In some situations (e.g., poorly soluble compounds) an initial assessment of phototoxicity
in an
in vitro assay might not be appropriate. In this case, an assessment in animals or
in humans could be considered. Alternatively, if drug distribution data are available,
they could, on a case-by-case basis, support a decision that no further photosafety
assessment is warranted (see Section 2.2).
If an
in vitro phototoxicity assay gives a positive result, a phototoxicity study in animals
could be conducted to assess whether the potential phototoxicity identified
in vitro
correlates with a response
in vivo. Alternatively, drug distribution data could, on a
case-by-case basis, support a position that the risk of phototoxicity
in vivo is very low and
that no further photosafety assessment is warranted (see Section 2.2). As another
option, the photosafety risk could be assessed in the clinical setting, or managed by the
use of light-protective measures. A negative result in an appropriately conducted
phototoxicity study either in animals or humans supersedes a positive
in vitro result. In
such cases no further testing is recommended and no direct phototoxicity is anticipated in
humans.
A positive result in an
in vivo animal study can, in certain circumstances, be mitigated
using a NOAEL-based risk assessment, typically considering Cmax comparisons.
Otherwise, a clinical assessment is warranted. In all cases a robust clinical
phototoxicity assessment indicating no concern supersedes any positive nonclinical
results.
A positive result in an
in vitro phototoxicity test would not be negated by a negative result
in a subsequently conducted chemical photoreactivity assay (e.g., a ROS assay).
In cases where an animal or clinical phototoxicity study has already been conducted,
there is no reason to subsequently conduct either a chemical photoreactivity or an
in vitro
phototoxicity assay.

-- 13 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
10
5.2. Recommendations for Pharmaceuticals Given
via Dermal Routes
5.2.1 Assessment of Phototoxicity Potential
If the active substance and excipients do not have MEC values greater than 1000 L mol-1
cm-1 (between 290 and 700 nm), no further photosafety testing is recommended and no
phototoxicity is anticipated in humans. For compounds with MEC values of 1000 L mol-1
cm-1 or higher, negative photoreactivity test results (e.g., a ROS assay) can support a
decision that no further photosafety assessment is warranted (see Note 5 for exception).
If further assessment is warranted, available data on the phototoxicity of chemical
class-related compounds should be evaluated, as this could inform on the approach to be
taken.
Tissue distribution is not a consideration for the phototoxicity of dermal products.
Dermal products are administered directly to the skin and hence, unless they are applied
to areas not usually exposed to light, are assumed to be present in light-exposed tissues.
5.2.2 Experimental Evaluation of Phototoxicity and Photoallergy
The 3T3 NRU-PT can be used to assess individually the phototoxicity potential of the API
and any new excipient(s), provided that appropriate testing conditions can be achieved
(e.g., test concentrations not limited by poor solubility, relevant UVB dose can be
applied). In cases where no phototoxic component has been identified
in vitro, the
overall phototoxicity potential of the clinical formulation can be regarded as low.
Some properties of the clinical formulation that could influence the potential phototoxic
response (e.g., penetration into skin, intracellular uptake) cannot be evaluated using the
3T3 NRU-PT alone. Therefore, confirmation of the overall negative result in an
evaluation using the clinical formulation and/or monitoring during clinical trials can still
be warranted.
Reconstructed human skin models can be used to assess the phototoxicity potential of
clinical formulations. Under adequate test conditions (see Section 3.3), a negative result
in a reconstructed human skin assay indicates that the direct phototoxicity potential of
the formulation can be regarded as low. In this case, generally no further phototoxicity
testing is recommended (see Note 5 for exception).
If an appropriate
in vitro assay is not available, the initial test could be an
in vivo
phototoxicity test on the clinical formulation. A negative result in an appropriately
conducted
in vivo animal phototoxicity study would be sufficient evidence that the
formulation is not directly phototoxic and no further phototoxicity testing is
recommended (see Note 5 for exception). Alternatively, the phototoxicity potential can
be assessed in the clinical setting.
For dermal products where the API or any new excipient has a MEC value greater than
1000 L mol-1 cm-1 at any wavelength between 290 and 700 nm, a photoallergy assessment
is generally warranted in addition to phototoxicity testing. As the predictivity of
nonclinical photoallergy tests is unknown, this would typically be a clinical assessment
using the to-be-marketed formulation and conducted during Phase 3.
Photosafety evaluation of the clinical formulation delivered
via dermal patches can follow
the above described principles for clinical dermal formulations. For transdermal
patches, the principles for both dermal and systemic drugs should be applied. In
addition, the intended clinical use (e.g., skin area recommended for use, duration of
application) and the properties of the patch matrix (e.g., being opaque to UV and visible
light) should be considered for the overall risk assessment.

-- 14 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
11
6. ENDNOTES
Note 1 For compounds that absorb at relevant wavelengths, have a MEC value greater
than 1000 L mol-1 cm-1, and are given
via ocular routes (e.g., eye drops,
intraocular injections), an evaluation of the phototoxicity potential should be
undertaken in accordance with the general principles of phototoxicity
assessment. Biodistribution of drug in the eye, and optical properties of the eye
should also be considered. Any available information on the compound or
chemical class-related compounds should be considered in the overall
assessment.
Compounds that only absorb light at wavelengths below 400 nm and are to be
administered as intraocular injections behind the lens (e.g., in the vitreous) are
of low concern for retinal phototoxicity, as only light of wavelengths greater than
400 nm reaches the back of the adult eye. However, the lens in children of less
than approximately 10 years of age is not completely protective against
wavelengths below 400 nm.
Note 2 Testing for photogenotoxicity is not recommended as a part of the standard
photosafety testing program. In the past, some regional guidelines (e.g.,
CPMP/SWP/398/01) have recommended that photogenotoxicity testing be
conducted, preferentially using a photoclastogenicity assay (chromosomal
aberration or micronucleus test) in mammalian cells
	in vitro. However,
experience with these models since the CPMP/SWP guideline was issued has
indicated that these tests are substantially oversensitive and even incidences of
pseudo-photoclastogenicity have been reported (Ref. 8). Furthermore, the
interpretation of photogenotoxicity data regarding its meaning for clinically
relevant enhancement of UV-mediated skin cancer is unclear.
Note 3 Standardized conditions for determination of the MECs are critical. Selection
of an adequate solvent is driven by both analytical requirements (e.g., dissolving
power, UV-visible light transparency) and physiological relevance (e.g., pH
7.4-buffered aqueous conditions). Methanol is recommended as a preferred
solvent and was used to support the MEC threshold of 1000 L mol-1 cm-1 (Ref. 3).
When measuring UV-visible light spectra, potential limitations (e.g., artifacts
due to high concentrations or low solubility, including slow precipitation) should
be considered. If the chromophore of the molecule appears to be pH-sensitive
(e.g., phenolic structure, aromatic amines, carboxylic acids, etc.) an additional
spectrum obtained under aqueous, pH 7.4-buffered conditions, could add
valuable information regarding differences in the shape of the absorption
spectrum and in the MECs. If significant differences are seen between
measurements obtained in methanol versus pH-adjusted conditions, the MEC
threshold of 1000 L mol-1 cm-1 cannot be used to obviate further photosafety
assessment.
Note 4 A survey of pharmaceutical companies indicated that the 3T3 NRU-PT, as
described in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Test
Guideline (OECD TG) 432, generates a high percentage of positive results
(approximately 50%), the majority of which do not correlate with phototoxicity
responses in animals or humans (Ref. 9). Following a retrospective review of
data for pharmaceuticals, a reduction of the maximum test concentration from
1000 to 100 μg/mL appears justified (Ref. 10). Compounds without any
significant cytotoxicity (under irradiation) up to this limit can be considered as
being devoid of relevant phototoxicity. In addition, the category named
“probable phototoxicity” per OECD TG 432 (i.e., Photo Irritation Factor (PIF)

-- 15 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
12
values between 2 and 5 or Mean Photo Effect (MPE) values between 0.10 and
0.15) is of questionable toxicological relevance for systemic drugs. Compounds
in this category generally do not warrant further photosafety evaluations. For
compounds with a PIF value between 2 and 5, and for which it is not possible to
determine an IC50 in the absence of irradiation, it is important to check that the
compound is not classified as positive using the MPE calculation, i.e., that the
MPE is less than 0.15.
Systemic drugs that are positive in the 3T3 NRU-PT only at
	in vitro
concentrations that are many times higher than drug concentrations likely to be
achieved in light-exposed tissues in humans, can, on a case-by-case basis, and in
consultation with regulatory authorities, be considered to be ‘low risk’ for
phototoxicity in humans , without follow-up
in vivo testing.
Note 5 In the United States, for products applied dermally, a dedicated clinical trial for
phototoxicity (photoirritation) on the to-be-marketed formulation (API plus all
excipients) can be warranted in support of product approval.

-- 16 of 19 --

13
7. GLOSSARY
3T3 NRU-PT:
In vitro 3T3 Neutral Red Uptake Phototoxicity Test.
Assessment:
In the context of this document, an assessment is an evaluation of all available
information and does not always mean an additional test is conducted.
Chromophore:
The substructure of a molecule that absorbs visible or ultraviolet light.
Dermal Drugs:
Products applied topically to the skin.
Direct Phototoxicity:
Phototoxicity induced by absorption of light by the drug or excipient.
Indirect Phototoxicity:
Phototoxicity due to cellular, biochemical or physiological alterations caused by the drug
or excipient, but not related to photochemical reactivity of the drug or excipient (e.g.,
perturbation of heme homeostasis).
Irradiance:
The intensity of UV or visible light incident on a surface, measured in W/m2 or mW/cm2.
Irradiation:
The process by which an object/subject is exposed to UV or visible radiation.
MEC:
Molar Extinction Coefficient (also called molar absorptivity) reflects the efficiency with
which a molecule can absorb a photon at a particular wavelength (typically expressed as
L mol-1 cm-1) and is influenced by several factors, such as solvent.
MPE:
The Mean Photo Effect is calculated for results of the 3T3 NRU-PT. The MPE is based
on comparison of the complete concentration response curves (see OECD TG 432).
NOAEL:
No Observed Adverse Effect Level.
OECD TG:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Test Guideline.
Outpatient Study:
A clinical study in which patients are not restricted to a clinical site.
Photoproducts:
New compounds/structures formed as a result of a photochemical reaction.
Photoreactivity:
The property of chemicals to react with another molecule as a consequence of absorption
of photons.
PIF:
Photo Irritation Factor is calculated for results of the 3T3 NRU-PT by comparing the IC50
values obtained with and without irradiation.

-- 17 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
14
ROS:
Reactive Oxygen Species, including superoxide anion and singlet oxygen.
Systemic drugs:
Products administered by a route that is intended to produce systemic exposure.
UVA:
Ultraviolet light A (wavelengths between 320 and 400 nm).
UVB:
Ultraviolet light B (wavelengths between 280 and 320 nm; as a part of sunlight
wavelengths between 290 and 320 nm).

-- 18 of 19 --

Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
15
8. REFERENCES
1. ICH M3(R2) Guideline: Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of
Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals; June 2009.
2. ICH S9 Guideline: Nonclinical Evaluation for Anticancer Pharmaceuticals; October
2009.
3. Bauer D, Averett LA, De Smedt A, Kleinman MH, Muster W, Pettersen BA, et al.
Standardized UV-vis spectra as the foundation for a threshold-based, integrated
photosafety evaluation. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 2014;68(1):70-5.
4. ICH Q1B Guideline: Stability Testing: Photostability Testing of New Drug Substances
and Products; November 1996.
5. Solar spectral irradiance. CIE 1989 Jan;85.
6. Test No. 432: In vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test. OECD Guidelines for the Testing of
Chemicals Section 4 2004 Nov.
7. Onoue S, Igarashi N, Yamada S, Tsuda Y. High-throughput reactive oxygen species
(ROS) assay: An enabling technology for screening the phototoxic potential of
pharmaceutical substances. J Pharm Biomed Anal 2008;46(1):187-93.
8. Lynch AM, Robinson SA, Wilcox P, Smith MD, Kleinman M, Jiang K, et al.
Cycloheximide and disulfoton are positive in the photoclastogenicity assay but do not
absorb UV irradiation: another example of pseudophotoclastogenicity? Mutagenesis
2008 Mar;23(2):111-8.
9. Lynch AM, Wilcox P. Review of the performance of the 3T3 NRU in vitro phototoxicity
assay in the pharmaceutical industry. Exp Toxicol Pathol 2011 Mar;63(3):209-14.
10. Ceridono M, Tellner P, Bauer D, Barroso J, Alépée N, Corvi R, et al. Workshop Report:
The 3T3 neutral red uptake phototoxicity test: Practical experience and implications
for phototoxicity testing – The report of an ECVAM–EFPIA workshop. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol 2012;63(3):480-8.

-- 19 of 19 --

