[SOURCE URL] https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/S6_R1_Guideline_0.pdf
[CHARS] 69616

INTERNATIONAL 	CONFERENCE 	ON 	HARMONISATION 	OF 	TECHNICAL
REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE
ICH HARMONISED TRIPARTITE G UIDELINE
P RECLINICAL SAFETY E VALUATION OF
BIOTECHNOLOGY -DERIVED P HARMACEUTICALS
S6(R1)
Parent Guideline dated 16 July 1997
Current Step 4 version
Addendum dated 12 June 2011 incorporated at the end of June 2011
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and
has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH
Process. At Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the
regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan and USA.

-- 1 of 23 --

S6(R1)
Document History
First
Codification History 	Date
New
Codification
November
2005
Parent Guideline: Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived
Pharmaceuticals
S6 Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2
and release for public consultation.
6
November
1996
S6
S6 	Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4
and recommendation for adoption to the three ICH
regulatory bodies.
16 July
1997
S6
Addendum to the Parent Guideline
S6(R1) Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2
and release for public consultation.
29 October
2009
S6(R1)
Current Step 4 version
S6(R1) 	Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4
and recommendation for adoption to the three ICH
regulatory bodies.
The 	Addendum 	has 	been 	incorporated 	into 	the
parent Guideline which is now renamed S6(R1).
12 June
2011
S6(R1)

-- 2 of 23 --

P RECLINICAL SAFETY E VALUATION OF
BIOTECHNOLOGY -DERIVED P HARMACEUTICALS
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline
TABLE OF CONTENTS
P ART I: ................................................................................................................................ 1
1. 	INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 1
1.1 	Background ................................................................................................................ 1
1.2 	Objectives ................................................................................................................... 1
1.3 	Scope .......................................................................................................................... 1
2. 	S PECIFICATION OF THE TEST M ATERIAL ................................................................. 2
3. 	P RECLINICAL SAFETY TESTING ................................................................................ 2
3.1 	General Principles ..................................................................................................... 2
3.2 	Biological Activity/Pharmacodynamics .................................................................... 3
3.3 	Animal Species/Model Selection ............................................................................... 3
3.4 	Number/Gender of Animals ...................................................................................... 4
3.5 	Administration/Dose Selection ................................................................................. 4
3.6 	Immunogenicity ......................................................................................................... 5
4. 	SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS ...................................................................................... 6
4.1 	Safety Pharmacology ................................................................................................. 6
4.2 	Exposure Assessment................................................................................................ 6
4.2.1 Pharmacokinetics and Toxicokinetics .............................................................. 6
4.2.2 Assays ................................................................................................................ 6
4.2.3 Metabolism ........................................................................................................ 7
4.3 	Single Dose Toxicity Studies..................................................................................... 7
4.4 	Repeated Dose Toxicity Studies................................................................................ 7
4.5 	Immunotoxicity Studies ............................................................................................ 7
4.6 	Reproductive Performance and Developmental Toxicity Studies ........................... 8
4.7 	Genotoxicity Studies ................................................................................................. 8
4.8 	Carcinogenicity Studies ............................................................................................ 8
4.9 	Local Tolerance Studies ............................................................................................ 9
NOTES.................................................................................................................................. 9
P ART II: ............................................................................................................................10
1. 	INTRODUCTION .........................................................................................................10
1.1 	Purpose of the Addendum ....................................................................................... 10
1.2 	Background .............................................................................................................. 10
1.3 	Scope of the Guideline ............................................................................................. 10
i

-- 3 of 23 --

ii
2. 	S PECIES SELECTION ................................................................................................ 11
2.1 	General Principles .................................................................................................. 11
2.2 	One or Two Species ................................................................................................. 11
2.3 	Use of Homologous Proteins ................................................................................... 12
3. 	STUDY DESIGN ......................................................................................................... 12
3.1 	Dose Selection and Application of PK/PD Principles ............................................ 12
3.2 	Duration of Studies ................................................................................................. 12
3.3 	Recovery .................................................................................................................. 13
3.4 	Exploratory Clinical Trials ..................................................................................... 13
4. 	IMMUNOGENICITY .................................................................................................... 13
5. 	REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY ............................................... 13
6. 	CARCINOGENICITY ................................................................................................... 16
NOTES ............................................................................................................................... 16
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................... 19

-- 4 of 23 --

P ART I:
P RECLINICAL SAFETY E VALUATION OF
BIOTECHNOLOGY -DERIVED P HARMACEUTICALS
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline
Having reached Step 4 of the ICH Process at the ICH Steering Committee meeting on
16 July 1997, this Guideline is recommended for adoption to the three regulatory
parties to ICH
1. 	I NTRODUCTION
1.1 	Background
Biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals (biopharmaceuticals) were initially developed
in the early 1980s. The first marketing authorisations were granted later in the
decade. Several guidelines and points-to-consider documents have been issued by
various regulatory agencies regarding safety assessment of these products. Review of
such documents, which are available from regulatory authorities, may provide useful
background in developing new biopharmaceuticals.
Considerable experience has now been gathered with submission of applications for
biopharmaceuticals. 	Critical 	review 	of 	this 	experience 	has 	been 	the 	basis 	for
development of this guidance that is intended to provide general principles for
designing scientifically acceptable preclinical safety evaluation programs.
1.2 	Objectives
Regulatory standards for biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals have generally been
comparable among the European Union, Japan and United States. All regions have
adopted 	a 	flexible, 	case-by-case, 	science-based 	approach 	to 	preclinical 	safety
evaluation needed to support clinical development and marketing authorisation. In
this rapidly evolving scientific area, there is a need for common understanding and
continuing dialogue among the regions.
The primary goals of preclinical safety evaluation are: 1) to identify an initial safe
dose and subsequent dose escalation schemes in humans; 2) to identify potential
target organs for toxicity and for the study of whether such toxicity is reversible; and
3) to identify safety parameters for clinical monitoring. Adherence to the principles
presented in this document is intended to improve the quality and consistency of the
preclinical safety data supporting the development of biopharmaceuticals.
1.3 	Scope
This guidance is intended primarily to recommend a basic framework for the
preclinical safety evaluation of biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals. It applies to
products derived from characterised cells through the use of a variety of expression
systems including bacteria, yeast, insect, plant, and mammalian cells. The intended
indications may include in vivo diagnostic, therapeutic, or prophylactic uses. The
active substances include proteins and peptides, their derivatives and products of
which they are components; they could be derived from cell cultures or produced using
recombinant DNA technology including production by transgenic plants and animals.
Examples 	include 	but 	are 	not 	limited 	to: 	cytokines, 	plasminogen 	activators,
1

-- 5 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
recombinant plasma factors, growth factors, fusion proteins, enzymes, receptors,
hormones, and monoclonal antibodies.
The principles outlined in this guidance may also be applicable to recombinant DNA
protein 	vaccines, 	chemically 	synthesised 	peptides, 	plasma 	derived 	products,
endogenous proteins extracted from human tissue, and oligonucleotide drugs.
This document does not cover antibiotics, allergenic extracts, heparin, vitamins,
cellular blood components, conventional bacterial or viral vaccines, DNA vaccines, or
cellular and gene therapies.
2. 	SPECIFICATION OF THE TEST MATERIAL
Safety concerns may arise from the presence of impurities or contaminants. It is
preferable to rely on purification processes to remove impurities and contaminants
rather than to establish a preclinical testing program for their qualification. In all
cases, the product should be sufficiently characterised to allow an appropriate design
of preclinical safety studies.
There are potential risks associated with host cell contaminants derived from
bacteria, yeast, insect, plants, and mammalian cells. The presence of cellular host
contaminants can result in allergic reactions and other immunopathological effects.
The adverse effects associated with nucleic acid contaminants are theoretical but
include potential integration into the host genome. For products derived from insect,
plant and mammalian cells, or transgenic plants and animals there may be an
additional risk of viral infections.
In general, the product that is used in the definitive pharmacology and toxicology
studies should be comparable to the product proposed for the initial clinical studies.
However, it is appreciated that during the course of development programs, changes
normally occur in the manufacturing process in order to improve product quality and
yields. The potential impact of such changes for extrapolation of the animal findings
to humans should be considered.
The comparability of the test material during a development program should be
demonstrated when a new or modified manufacturing process or other significant
changes in the product or formulation are made in an ongoing development program.
Comparability 	can 	be 	evaluated 	on 	the 	basis 	of 	biochemical 	and 	biological
characterisation (i.e., identity, purity, stability, and potency). In some cases additional
studies may be needed (i.e., pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and/or safety). The
scientific rationale for the approach taken should be provided.
3. 	P RECLINICAL SAFETY TESTING
3.1 	General Principles
The objectives of the preclinical safety studies are to define pharmacological and
toxicological effects not only prior to initiation of human studies but throughout
clinical development. Both in vitro and in vivo studies can contribute to this
characterisation. Biopharmaceuticals that are structurally and pharmacologically
comparable to a product for which there is wide experience in clinical practice may
need less extensive toxicity testing.
Preclinical safety testing should consider:
1) 	selection of the relevant animal species;
2

-- 6 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
2) 	age;
3) 	physiological state;
4) 	the manner of delivery, including dose, route of administration, and treatment
regimen; and
5) 	stability of the test material under the conditions of use.
Toxicity studies are expected to be performed in compliance with Good Laboratory
Practice (GLP); however, it is recognised that some studies employing specialised test
systems which are often needed for biopharmaceuticals, may not be able to comply
fully with GLP. Areas of non-compliance should be identified and their significance
evaluated relative to the overall safety assessment. In some cases, lack of full GLP
compliance does not necessarily mean that the data from these studies cannot be used
to support clinical trials and marketing authorisations.
Conventional 	approaches 	to 	toxicity 	testing 	of 	pharmaceuticals 	may 	not 	be
appropriate for biopharmaceuticals due to the unique and diverse structural and
biological 	properties 	of 	the 	latter 	that 	may 	include 	species 	specificity,
immunogenicity, and unpredicted pleiotropic activities.
3.2 	Biological Activity/Pharmacodynamics
Biological activity may be evaluated using in vitro assays to determine which effects
of the product may be related to clinical activity. The use of cell lines and/or primary
cell cultures can be useful to examine the direct effects on cellular phenotype and
proliferation. 	Due 	to 	the 	species 	specificity 	of 	many 	biotechnology-derived
pharmaceuticals, it is important to select relevant animal species for toxicity testing.
In vitro cell lines derived from mammalian cells can be used to predict specific aspects
of in vivo activity and to assess quantitatively the relative sensitivity of various
species (including human) to the biopharmaceutical. Such studies may be designed to
determine, for example, receptor occupancy, receptor affinity, and/or pharmacological
effects, and to assist in the selection of an appropriate animal species for further in
vivo pharmacology and toxicology studies. The combined results from in vitro and in
vivo studies assist in the extrapolation of the findings to humans. In vivo studies to
assess pharmacological activity, including defining mechanism(s) of action, are often
used to support the rationale of the proposed use of the product in clinical studies.
For monoclonal antibodies, the immunological properties of the antibody should be
described in detail, including its antigenic specificity, complement binding, and any
unintentional reactivity and/or cytotoxicity towards human tissues distinct from the
intended target. Such cross-reactivity studies should be carried out by appropriate
immunohistochemical procedures using a range of human tissues.
3.3 	Animal Species/Model Selection
The 	biological 	activity 	together 	with 	species 	and/or 	tissue 	specificity 	of 	many
biotechnology-derived 	pharmaceuticals 	often 	preclude 	standard 	toxicity 	testing
designs in commonly used species (e.g., rats and dogs). Safety evaluation programs
should include the use of relevant species. A relevant species is one in which the test
material is pharmacologically active due to the expression of the receptor or an
epitope 	(in 	the 	case 	of 	monoclonal 	antibodies). 	A 	variety 	of 	techniques 	(e.g.,
immunochemical or functional tests) can be used to identify a relevant species.
Knowledge of receptor/epitope distribution can provide greater understanding of
potential in vivo toxicity.
3

-- 7 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
Relevant animal species for testing of monoclonal antibodies are those that express
the desired epitope and demonstrate a similar tissue cross-reactivity profile as for
human tissues. This would optimise the ability to evaluate toxicity arising from the
binding to the epitope and any unintentional tissue cross-reactivity. An animal
species which does not express the desired epitope may still be of some relevance for
assessing toxicity if comparable unintentional tissue cross-reactivity to humans is
demonstrated.
Safety evaluation programs should normally include two relevant species. However,
in certain justified cases one relevant species may suffice (e.g., when only one relevant
species can be identified or where the biological activity of the biopharmaceutical is
well understood). In addition even where two species may be necessary to characterise
toxicity in short term studies, it may be possible to justify the use of only one species
for subsequent long term toxicity studies (e.g., if the toxicity profile in the two species
is comparable in the short term).
Toxicity studies in non-relevant species may be misleading and are discouraged.
When no relevant species exists, the use of relevant transgenic animals expressing
the human receptor or the use of homologous proteins should be considered. The
information gained from use of a transgenic animal model expressing the human
receptor is optimised when the interaction of the product and the humanised receptor
has similar physiological consequences to those expected in humans. While useful
information may also be gained from the use of homologous proteins, it should be
noted 	that 	the 	production 	process, 	range 	of 	impurities/contaminants,
pharmacokinetics, and exact pharmacological mechanism(s) may differ between the
homologous form and the product intended for clinical use. Where it is not possible to
use transgenic animal models or homologous proteins, it may still be prudent to
assess some aspects of potential toxicity in a limited toxicity evaluation in a single
species, e.g., a repeated dose toxicity study of < 14 days duration that includes an
evaluation of important functional endpoints (e.g., cardiovascular and respiratory).
In recent years, there has been much progress in the development of animal models
that are thought to be similar to the human disease. These animal models include
induced 	and 	spontaneous 	models 	of 	disease, 	gene 	knockout(s), 	and 	transgenic
animals. These models may provide further insight, not only in determining the
pharmacological action of the product, pharmacokinetics, and dosimetry, but may also
be useful in the determination of safety (e.g., evaluation of undesirable promotion of
disease progression). In certain cases, studies performed in animal models of disease
may be used as an acceptable alternative to toxicity studies in normal animals
(Note 1). The scientific justification for the use of these animal models of disease to
support safety should be provided.
3.4 	Number/Gender of Animals
The number of animals used per dose has a direct bearing on the ability to detect
toxicity. A small sample size may lead to failure to observe toxic events due to
observed frequency alone regardless of severity. The limitations that are imposed by
sample size, as often is the case for non-human primate studies, may be in part
compensated by increasing the frequency and duration of monitoring. Both genders
should generally be used or justification given for specific omissions.
3.5 	Administration/Dose Selection
The route and frequency of administration should be as close as possible to that
proposed for clinical use. Consideration should be given to pharmacokinetics and
bioavailability of the product in the species being used, and the volume which can be
4

-- 8 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
safely and humanely administered to the test animals. For example, the frequency of
administration in laboratory animals may be increased compared to the proposed
schedule for the human clinical studies in order to compensate for faster clearance
rates or low solubility of the active ingredient. In these cases, the level of exposure of
the test animal relative to the clinical exposure should be defined. Consideration
should also be given to the effects of volume, concentration, formulation, and site of
administration. The use of routes of administration other than those used clinically
may be acceptable if the route must be modified due to limited bioavailability,
limitations due to the route of administration, or to size/physiology of the animal
species.
Dosage 	levels 	should 	be 	selected 	to 	provide 	information 	on 	a 	dose-response
relationship, including a toxic dose and a no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL).
For some classes of products with little to no toxicity it may not be possible to define a
specific maximum dose. In these cases, a scientific justification of the rationale for the
dose selection and projected multiples of human exposure should be provided. To
justify 	high 	dose 	selection, 	consideration 	should 	be 	given 	to 	the 	expected
pharmacological/physiological effects, availability of suitable test material, and the
intended clinical use. Where a product has a lower affinity to or potency in the cells of
the selected species than in human cells, testing of higher doses may be important.
The multiples of the human dose that are needed to determine adequate safety
margins may vary with each class of biotechnology-derived pharmaceutical and its
clinical indication(s).
3.6 	Immunogenicity
Many biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals intended for human are immunogenic in
animals. Therefore, measurement of antibodies associated with administration of
these types of products should be performed when conducting repeated dose toxicity
studies in order to aid in the interpretation of these studies. Antibody responses
should be characterised (e.g., titer, number of responding animals, neutralising or
non-neutralising), 	and 	their 	appearance 	should 	be 	correlated 	with 	any
pharmacological and/or toxicological changes. Specifically, the effects of antibody
formation 	on 	pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic 	parameters, 	incidence 	and/or
severity of adverse effects, complement activation, or the emergence of new toxic
effects should be considered when interpreting the data. Attention should also be paid
to 	the 	evaluation 	of 	possible 	pathological 	changes 	related 	to 	immune 	complex
formation and deposition.
The detection of antibodies should not be the sole criterion for the early termination of
a preclinical safety study or modification in the duration of the study design unless
the immune response neutralises the pharmacological and/or toxicological effects of
the biopharmaceutical in a large proportion of the animals. In most cases, the
immune response to biopharmaceuticals is variable, like that observed in humans. If
the interpretation of the data from the safety study is not compromised by these
issues, then no special significance should be ascribed to the antibody response.
The induction of antibody formation in animals is not predictive of a potential for
antibody formation in humans. Humans may develop serum antibodies against
humanised 	proteins, 	and 	frequently 	the 	therapeutic 	response 	persists 	in 	their
presence. The occurrence of severe anaphylactic responses to recombinant proteins is
rare in humans. In this regard, the results of guinea pig anaphylaxis tests, which are
generally positive for protein products, are not predictive for reactions in humans;
therefore, such studies are considered of little value for the routine evaluation of these
types of products.
5

-- 9 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
4. 	SPECIFIC C ONSIDERATIONS
4.1 	Safety Pharmacology
It is important to investigate the potential for undesirable pharmacological activity in
appropriate 	animal 	models 	and, 	where 	necessary, 	to 	incorporate 	particular
monitoring for these activities in the toxicity studies and/or clinical studies. Safety
pharmacology 	studies 	measure 	functional 	indices 	of 	potential 	toxicity. 	These
functional indices may be investigated in separate studies or incorporated in the
design of toxicity studies. The aim of the safety pharmacology studies should be to
reveal any functional effects on the major physiological systems (e.g., cardiovascular,
respiratory, renal, and central nervous systems). Investigations may also include the
use of isolated organs or other test systems not involving intact animals. All of these
studies may allow for a mechanistically-based explanation of specific organ toxicities,
which should be considered carefully with respect to human use and indication(s).
4.2 	Exposure Assessment
4.2.1 Pharmacokinetics and Toxicokinetics
It 	is 	difficult 	to 	establish 	uniform 	guidelines 	for 	pharmacokinetic 	studies 	for
biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals. Single and multiple dose pharmacokinetics,
toxicokinetics, and tissue distribution studies in relevant species are useful; however,
routine studies that attempt to assess mass balance are not useful. Differences in
pharmacokinetics among animal species may have a significant impact on the
predictiveness of animal studies or on the assessment of dose response relationships
in toxicity studies. Alterations in the pharmacokinetic profile due to immune-
mediated clearance mechanisms may affect the kinetic profiles and the interpretation
of the toxicity data. For some products there may also be inherent, significant delays
in the expression of pharmacodynamic effects relative to the pharmacokinetic profile
(e.g., cytokines) or there may be prolonged expression of pharmacodynamic effects
relative to plasma levels.
Pharmacokinetic studies should, whenever possible, utilise preparations that are
representative of that intended for toxicity testing and clinical use, and employ a
route of administration that is relevant to the anticipated clinical studies. Patterns of
absorption may be influenced by formulation, concentration, site, and/or volume.
Whenever 	possible, 	systemic exposure should be monitored during the toxicity
studies.
When using radiolabeled proteins, it is important to show that the radiolabeled test
material maintains activity and biological properties equivalent to that of the
unlabeled material. Tissue concentrations of radioactivity and/or autoradiography
data using radiolabeled proteins may be difficult to interpret due to rapid in vivo
metabolism 	or 	unstable 	radiolabeled 	linkage. 	Care 	should 	be 	taken 	in 	the
interpretation of studies using radioactive tracers incorporated into specific amino
acids because of recycling of amino acids into non-drug related proteins/peptides.
Some information on absorption, disposition and clearance in relevant animal models
should be available prior to clinical studies in order to predict margins of safety based
upon exposure and dose.
4.2.2 Assays
The use of one or more assay methods should be addressed on a case-by-case basis
and the scientific rationale should be provided. One validated method is usually
considered sufficient. For example, quantitation of TCA-precipitable radioactivity
6

-- 10 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
following administration of a radiolabeled protein may provide adequate information,
but a specific assay for the analyte is preferred. Ideally the assay methods should be
the same for animals and humans. The possible influence of plasma binding proteins
and/or antibodies in plasma/serum on the assay performance should be determined.
4.2.3 Metabolism
The expected consequence of metabolism of biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals is
the 	degradation 	to 	small 	peptides 	and 	individual 	amino 	acids. 	Therefore, 	the
metabolic pathways are generally understood. Classical biotransformation studies as
performed for pharmaceuticals are not needed.
Understanding the behaviour of the biopharmaceutical in the biologic matrix, (e.g.,
plasma, serum, cerebral spinal fluid) and the possible influence of binding proteins is
important for understanding the pharmacodynamic effect.
4.3 	Single Dose Toxicity Studies
Single dose studies may generate useful data to describe the relationship of dose to
systemic and/or local toxicity. These data can be used to select doses for repeated dose
toxicity studies. Information on dose- response relationships may be gathered through
the conduct of a single dose toxicity study, as a component of pharmacology or animal
model efficacy studies. The incorporation of safety pharmacology parameters in the
design of these studies should be considered.
4.4 	Repeated Dose Toxicity Studies
For consideration of the selection of animal species for repeated dose studies see
Section 3.3. The route and dosing regimen (e.g., daily versus intermittent dosing)
should reflect the intended clinical use or exposure. When feasible, these studies
should include toxicokinetics.
A recovery period should generally be included in study designs to determine the
reversal 	or 	potential 	worsening 	of 	pharmacological/toxicological 	effects, 	and/or
potential 	delayed 	toxic 	effects. 	For 	biopharmaceuticals 	that 	induce 	prolonged
pharmacological/toxicological effects, recovery group animals should be monitored
until reversibility is demonstrated. The duration of repeated dose studies should be
based on the intended duration of clinical exposure and disease indication. This
duration of animal dosing has generally been 1-3 months for most biotechnology-
derived pharmaceuticals. For biopharmaceuticals intended for short-term use ( e.g., <
to 7 days) and for acute life-threatening diseases, repeated dose studies up to two
weeks duration have been considered adequate to support clinical studies as well as
marketing 	authorisation. 	For 	those 	biopharmaceuticals 	intended 	for 	chronic
indications, studies of 6 months duration have generally been appropriate although in
some cases shorter or longer durations have supported marketing authorisations. For
biopharmaceuticals intended for chronic use, the duration of long term toxicity studies
should be scientifically justified.
4.5 	Immunotoxicity Studies
One 	aspect 	of 	immunotoxicological 	evaluation 	includes 	assessment 	of 	potential
immunogenicity (see Section 3.6). Many biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals are
intended to stimulate or suppress the immune system and therefore may affect not
only 	humoral 	but 	also 	cell-mediated 	immunity. 	Inflammatory 	reactions 	at 	the
injection site may be indicative of a stimulatory response. It is important, however, to
recognise that simple injection trauma and/or specific toxic effects caused by the
formulation vehicle may also result in toxic changes at the injection site. In addition,
7

-- 11 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
the 	expression 	of 	surface 	antigens 	on 	target 	cells 	may 	be altered, which has
implications for autoimmune potential. Immunotoxicological testing strategies may
require screening studies followed by mechanistic studies to clarify such issues.
Routine tiered testing approaches or standard testing batteries, however, are not
recommended for biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals.
4.6 	Reproductive Performance and Developmental Toxicity Studies
The need for reproductive/developmental toxicity studies is dependent upon the
product, clinical indication and intended patient population (Note 2). The specific
study design and dosing schedule may be modified based on issues related to species
specificity, immunogenicity, biological activity and/or a long elimination half-life. For
example, concerns regarding potential developmental immunotoxicity, which may
apply particularly to certain monoclonal antibodies with prolonged immunological
effects, could be addressed in a study design modified to assess immune function of
the neonate.
4.7 	Genotoxicity Studies
The range and type of genotoxicity studies routinely conducted for pharmaceuticals
are not applicable to biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals and therefore are not
needed. Moreover, the administration of large quantities of peptides/proteins may
yield uninterpretable results. It is not expected that these substances would interact
directly with DNA or other chromosomal material (Note 3).
Studies in available and relevant systems, including newly developed systems, should
be performed in those cases where there is cause for concern about the product (e.g.,
because of the presence of an organic linker molecule in a conjugated protein product).
The use of standard genotoxicity studies for assessing the genotoxic potential of
process contaminants is not considered appropriate. If performed for this purpose,
however, the rationale should be provided.
4.8 	Carcinogenicity Studies
Standard carcinogenicity bioassays are generally inappropriate for biotechnology-
derived 	pharmaceuticals. 	However, 	product-specific 	assessment 	of 	carcinogenic
potential may still be needed depending upon duration of clinical dosing, patient
population 	and/or 	biological 	activity 	of 	the 	product 	(e.g., 	growth 	factors,
immunosuppressive agents, etc.) When there is a concern about carcinogenic potential
a variety of approaches may be considered to evaluate risk.
Products 	that 	may 	have 	the 	potential 	to 	support 	or 	induce 	proliferation 	of
transformed cells and clonal expansion possibly leading to neoplasia should be
evaluated with respect to receptor expression in various malignant and normal
human cells that are potentially relevant to the patient population under study. The
ability of the product to stimulate growth of normal or malignant cells expressing the
receptor should be determined. When in vitro data give cause for concern about
carcinogenic potential, further studies in relevant animal models may be needed.
Incorporation of sensitive indices of cellular proliferation in long term repeated dose
toxicity studies may provide useful information.
In those cases where the product is biologically active and non-immunogenic in
rodents and other studies have not provided sufficient information to allow an
assessment of carcinogenic potential then the utility of a single rodent species should
be considered. Careful consideration should be given to the selection of doses. The use
of 	a 	combination 	of 	pharmacokinetic 	and 	pharmacodynamic 	endpoints 	with
consideration of comparative receptor characteristics and intended human exposures
8

-- 12 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
9
represents the most scientifically based approach for defining the appropriate doses.
The rationale for the selection of doses should be provided.
4.9 	Local Tolerance Studies
Local tolerance should be evaluated. The formulation intended for marketing should
be 	tested; 	however, 	in 	certain 	justified 	cases, 	the 	testing 	of 	representative
formulations may be acceptable. In some cases, the potential adverse effects of the
product can be evaluated in single or repeated dose toxicity studies thus obviating the
need for separate local tolerance studies.
N OTES
Note 1 	Animal models of disease may be useful in defining toxicity endpoints,
selection 	of 	clinical 	indications, 	and 	determination 	of 	appropriate
formulations, route of administration, and treatment regimen. It should be
noted that with these models of disease there is often a paucity of historical
data for use as a reference when evaluating study results. Therefore, the
collection of concurrent control and baseline data is critical to optimise study
design.
Note 2 	There may be extensive public information available regarding potential
reproductive and/or developmental effects of a particular class of compounds
(e.g., interferons) where the only relevant species is the non-human primate.
In such cases, mechanistic studies indicating that similar effects are likely to
be caused by a new but related molecule, may obviate the need for formal
reproductive/developmental toxicity studies. In each case, the scientific basis
for assessing the potential for possible effects on reproduction/development
should be provided.
Note 3 	With 	some 	biopharmaceuticals 	there 	is 	a 	potential 	concern 	about
accumulation of spontaneously mutated cells (e.g., via facilitating a selective
advantage of proliferation) leading to carcinogenicity. The standard battery of
genotoxicity tests is not designed to detect these conditions. Alternative in
vitro or in vivo models to address such concerns may have to be developed and
evaluated.

-- 13 of 23 --

P ART II:
A DDENDUM TO S6
P RECLINICAL SAFETY E VALUATION OF
BIOTECHNOLOGY -DERIVED P HARMACEUTICALS
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline
Having reached Step 4 of the ICH Process on 12 June 2011 and been incorporated in
the parent Guideline at the end of June 2011, this Guideline is recommended for
adoption to the three regulatory parties to ICH
Preamble:
This addendum should be read in close conjunction with the original ICH S6
Guideline. In general the addendum is complementary to the guideline, and where
the addendum differs from the original guideline, the guidance in the addendum
prevails.
1. 	INTRODUCTION
1.1 	Purpose of the Addendum
The purpose of the addendum is to complement and provide clarification on and
update the following topics discussed in the original ICH S6 Guideline: species
selection, study design, immunogenicity, reproductive and developmental toxicity and
assessment of carcinogenic potential. Scientific advances and experience gained since
publication of the original ICH S6 Guideline call for this addendum. This harmonised
addendum will help to define the current recommendations and reduce the likelihood
that substantial differences will exist among regions.
This guidance should facilitate the timely conduct of clinical trials, reduce the use of
animals in accordance with the 3Rs (reduce/refine/replace) principles and reduce the
use of other drug development resources. Although not discussed in this guidance,
consideration should be given to the use of appropriate in vitro alternative methods
for safety evaluation. These methods, if accepted by all ICH regulatory authorities,
can be used to replace current standard methods.
This 	guidance 	promotes 	safe 	and 	ethical 	development 	and 	availability 	of 	new
pharmaceuticals.
1.2 	Background
The recommendations of this addendum further harmonise the nonclinical safety
studies to support the various stages of clinical development among the regions of
European 	Union 	(EU), 	Japan, 	and 	the 	United 	States. 	The 	present 	addendum
represents the consensus that exists regarding the safety evaluation of biotechnology-
derived pharmaceuticals.
1.3 	Scope of the Guideline
This addendum does not alter the scope of the original ICH S6 Guideline. For
biotechnology-derived products intended to be used in oncology the Guidance on
Nonclinical Evaluation for Anticancer Pharmaceuticals (ICH S9 Guideline) should be
consulted.
10

-- 14 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
2. 	SPECIES SELECTION
2.1 	General Principles
A number of factors should be taken into account when determining species relevancy.
Comparisons of target sequence homology between species can be an appropriate
starting point, followed by in vitro assays to make qualitative and quantitative cross-
species comparisons of relative target binding affinities and receptor/ligand occupancy
and kinetics.
Assessments of functional activity are also recommended. Functional activity can be
demonstrated in species-specific cell-based systems and/or in vivo pharmacology or
toxicology studies. Modulation of a known biologic response or of a pharmacodynamic
(PD) marker can provide evidence for functional activity to support species relevance.
Consideration of species differences in target binding and functional activity in the
context of the intended dosing regime should provide confidence that a model is
capable of demonstrating potentially adverse consequences of target modulation.
When the target is expressed at very low levels in typical healthy preclinical species
(e.g., inflammatory cytokines or tumour antigens), binding affinity and activity in cell-
based systems can be sufficient to guide species selection.
Assessment of tissue cross reactivity in animal tissues is of limited value for species
selection (see Note 1). However, in specific cases (i.e., where the approaches described
above cannot be used to demonstrate a pharmacologically relevant species) tissue
cross-reactivity (TCR) studies can be used to guide selection of toxicology species by
comparison of tissue binding profiles in human and those animal tissues where target
binding is expected.
As described in ICH S6 Guideline, when no relevant species can be identified because
the biopharmaceutical does not interact with the orthologous target in any species,
use of homologous molecules or transgenic models can be considered.
For monoclonal antibodies and other related antibody products directed at foreign
targets (i.e., bacterial, viral targets etc.), a short-term safety study (see ICH S6
Guideline) in one species (choice of species to be justified by the sponsor) can be
considered; no additional toxicity studies, including reproductive toxicity studies, are
appropriate. Alternatively, when animal models of disease are used to evaluate proof
of principle, a safety assessment can be included to provide information on potential
target-associated 	safety 	aspects. 	Where 	this 	is 	not 	feasible, 	appropriate 	risk
mitigation strategies should be adopted for clinical trials.
Species selection for an antibody-drug/toxin conjugate (ADC) incorporating a novel
toxin/toxicant should follow the same general principles as an unconjugated antibody
(see above and see Note 2).
2.2 	One or Two Species
If there are two pharmacologically relevant species for the clinical candidate (one
rodent and one non-rodent), then both species should be used for short-term (up to 1
month duration) general toxicology studies. If the toxicological findings from these
studies are similar or the findings are understood from the mechanism of action of the
product, 	then 	longer-term 	general 	toxicity 	studies 	in 	one 	species 	are 	usually
considered sufficient. The rodent species should be considered unless there is a
scientific rationale for using non-rodents. Studies in two non-rodent species are not
appropriate.
11

-- 15 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
The use of one species for all general toxicity studies is justified when the clinical
candidate is pharmacologically active in only one species. Studies in a second species
with 	a 	homologous 	product 	are 	not 	considered 	to 	add 	further 	value 	for 	risk
assessment and are not recommended.
2.3 	Use of Homologous Proteins
Use of homologous proteins is one of the alternative approaches described under ICH
S6 Guideline Section 3.3. Studies with homologous proteins can be used for hazard
detection and understanding the potential for adverse effects due to exaggerated
pharmacology, 	but 	are 	generally 	not 	useful 	for 	quantitative 	risk 	assessment.
Therefore, for the purposes of hazard identification it can be possible to conduct safety
evaluation studies using a control group and one treatment group provided there is a
scientific 	justification 	for 	the 	study 	design 	and 	dose 	selected 	(e.g., 	maximum
pharmacological dose).
3. 	STUDY DESIGN
3.1 	Dose Selection and Application of PK/PD Principles
The toxicity of most biopharmaceuticals is related to their targeted mechanism of
action; therefore, relatively high doses can elicit adverse effects which are apparent as
exaggerated pharmacology.
A 	rationale 	should 	be 	provided 	for 	dose 	selection 	taking 	into 	account 	the
characteristics of the dose-response relationship. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic
(PK-PD) approaches (e.g., simple exposure-response relationships or more complex
modeling and simulation approaches) can assist in high dose selection by identifying
1) a dose which provides the maximum intended pharmacological effect in the
preclinical species; and 2) a dose which provides an approximately 10-fold exposure
multiple over the maximum exposure to be achieved in the clinic. The higher of these
two doses should be chosen for the high dose group in preclinical toxicity studies
unless there is a justification for using a lower dose (e.g., maximum feasible dose).
Where in vivo/ex vivo PD endpoints are not available, the high dose selection can be
based 	on 	PK 	data 	and 	available 	in 	vitro 	binding 	and/or 	pharmacology 	data.
Corrections for differences in target binding and in vitro pharmacological activity
between the nonclinical species and humans should be taken into account to adjust
the exposure margin over the highest anticipated clinical exposure. For example, a
large relative difference in binding affinity and/or in vitro potency might suggest that
testing higher doses in the nonclinical studies is appropriate. In the event that
toxicity cannot be demonstrated at the doses selected using this approach, then
additional toxicity studies at higher multiples of human dosing are unlikely to provide
additional useful information.
3.2 	Duration of Studies
For chronic use products, repeat dose toxicity studies of 6 months duration in rodents
or non-rodents are considered sufficient, providing the high dose is selected in
accordance with the principles above in Section 3.1. Studies of longer duration have
not 	generally 	provided 	useful 	information 	that 	changed 	the 	clinical 	course 	of
development.
For chronic use of biopharmaceutical products developed for patients with advanced
cancer, the principles for duration of toxicology studies are outlined in ICH S9
Guideline.
12

-- 16 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
3.3 	Recovery
Recovery from pharmacological and toxicological effects with potential adverse clinical
impact should be understood when they occur at clinically relevant exposures. This
information can be obtained by an understanding that the particular effect observed
is generally reversible/non-reversible or by including a non-dosing period in at least
one study, at at least one dose level, to be justified by the sponsor. The purpose of the
non-dosing period is to examine reversibility of these effects, not to assess delayed
toxicity. The demonstration of complete recovery is not considered essential. The
addition of a recovery period just to assess potential for immunogenicity is not
required.
3.4 	Exploratory Clinical Trials
The flexible approaches to support exploratory clinical trials as outlined in ICH
M3(R2) Guideline can be applicable to biopharmaceuticals. It is recommended that
these approaches be discussed and agreed upon with the appropriate regulatory
authority.
4. 	IMMUNOGENICITY
Immunogenicity assessments are conducted to assist in the interpretation of the study
results and design of subsequent studies. Such analyses in nonclinical animal studies
are not relevant in terms of predicting potential immunogenicity of human or
humanized proteins in humans.
Measurement 	of 	anti-drug 	antibodies 	(ADA) 	in 	nonclinical 	studies 	should 	be
evaluated when there is 1) evidence of altered PD activity; 2) unexpected changes in
exposure in the absence of a PD marker; or 3) evidence of immune-mediated reactions
(immune complex disease, vasculitis, anaphylaxis, etc.). Since, it is difficult to predict
whether such analysis will be called for prior to completion of the in-life phase of the
study, it is often useful to obtain appropriate samples during the course of the study,
which can subsequently be analyzed when warranted to aid in interpretation of the
study results. When ADAs are detected, their impact on the interpretation of the
study results should be assessed (see also Part I, Section 3.6, Paragraph 2 for further
guidance on the impact of immunogenicity).
Characterization of neutralizing potential is warranted when ADAs are detected and
there is no PD marker to demonstrate sustained activity in the in vivo toxicology
studies. Neutralizing antibody activity can be assessed indirectly with ex vivo
bioactivity assay or an appropriate combination of assay formats for PK-PD, or
directly in a specific neutralizing antibody assay.
5. 	REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY
5.1 	General Comments
Reproductive toxicity studies should be conducted in accordance with the principles
outlined in ICH S5(R2) Guideline; however, the specific study design and dosing
schedule can be modified based on an understanding of species specificity, the nature
of the product and mechanism of action, immunogenicity and/or pharmacokinetic
behaviour and embryo-fetal exposure.
An assessment of reproductive toxicity with the clinical candidate in a relevant
species is generally preferred. The evaluation of toxicity to reproduction should be
conducted only in pharmacologically relevant species. When the clinical candidate is
pharmacologically active in rodents and rabbits, both species should be used for
13

-- 17 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
embryo-fetal 	development 	(EFD) 	studies, 	unless 	embryo-fetal 	lethality 	or
teratogenicity has been identified in one species.
Developmental toxicity studies should only be conducted in non-human primates
(NHPs) when they are the only relevant species.
When the clinical candidate is pharmacologically active only in NHPs, there is still a
preference to test the clinical candidate. However an alternative model can be used in
place of NHPs if appropriate scientific justification is provided
When no relevant animal species exists for testing the clinical candidate, the use of
transgenic mice expressing the human target or homologous protein in a species
expressing an ortholog of the human target can be considered, assuming that
sufficient background knowledge exists for the model (e.g., historical background
data) (see Part I, Note 1). For products that are directed at a foreign target such as
bacteria and viruses, in general no reproductive toxicity studies would be expected
(see Section 2.1).
When the weight of evidence (e.g., mechanism of action, phenotypic data from
genetically modified animals, class effects) suggests that there will be an adverse
effect on fertility or pregnancy outcome, these data can provide adequate information
to communicate risk to reproduction, and under appropriate circumstances additional
nonclinical studies might not be warranted.
5.2 	Fertility
For 	products 	where 	mice 	and 	rats 	are 	pharmacologically 	relevant 	species, 	an
assessment of fertility can be made in one of these rodent species (see ICH S5
Guideline). ICH S5 Guideline study designs can be adapted for other species provided
they are pharmacologically relevant; in addition, the design of the study should be
amended as appropriate, for example to address the nature of the product and
potential for immunogenicity.
It is recognized that mating studies are not practical for NHPs. However, when the
NHP is the only relevant species, the potential for effects on male and female fertility
can 	be 	assessed 	by 	evaluation 	of 	the 	reproductive 	tract 	(organ 	weights 	and
histopathological evaluation) in repeat dose toxicity studies of at least 3 months
duration using sexually mature NHPs. If there is a specific cause for concern based on
pharmacological 	activity 	or 	previous 	findings, 	specialized 	assessments 	such 	as
menstrual cyclicity, sperm count, sperm morphology/motility, and male or female
reproductive hormone levels can be evaluated in a repeat dose toxicity study.
If there is a specific concern from the pharmacological activity about potential effects
on conception/implantation and the NHP is the only relevant species, the concern
should be addressed experimentally. A homologous product or transgenic model could
be the only practical means to assess potential effects on conception or implantation
when those are of specific concern. However, it is not recommended to produce a
homologous product or transgenic model solely to conduct mating studies in rodents.
In absence of nonclinical information, the risk to patients should be mitigated through
clinical trial management procedures, informed consent and appropriate product
labeling.
5.3 	Embryo-Fetal 	Development 	(EFD) 	and 	Pre/Post-Natal 	Development
(PPND)
Potential differences in placental transfer of biopharmaceuticals should be considered
in the design and interpretation of developmental toxicity studies (see Note 3).
14

-- 18 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
For products pharmacologically active only in NHPs, several study designs can be
considered based on intended clinical use and expected pharmacology. Separate EFD
and/or PPND studies, or other study designs (justified by the sponsor) can be
appropriate, particularly when there is some concern that the mechanism of action
might lead to an adverse effect on embryo-fetal development or pregnancy loss.
However, one well-designed study in NHPs which includes dosing from day 20 of
gestation to birth (enhanced PPND, ePPND) can be considered, rather than separate
EFD and/or PPND studies.
For the single ePPND study design described above, no Caesarian section group is
warranted, but assessment of pregnancy outcome at natural delivery should be
performed. 	This 	study 	should 	also 	evaluate 	offspring 	viability, 	external
malformations, skeletal effects (e.g., by X-ray) and, ultimately, visceral morphology at
necropsy. 	Ultrasound 	is 	useful 	to 	track 	maintenance 	of 	pregnancy 	but 	is 	not
appropriate for detecting malformations. These latter data are derived from post-
partum observations. Because of confounding effects on maternal care of offspring,
dosing of the mother post-partum is generally not recommended. Other endpoints in
the offspring can also be evaluated if relevant for the pharmacological activity. The
duration of the post-natal phase will be dependent on which additional endpoints are
considered relevant based on mechanism of action (see Note 4).
Developmental toxicity studies in NHPs can only provide hazard identification. The
number of animals per group should be sufficient to allow meaningful interpretation
of the data (see Note 5).
The sponsor should justify the study design if other NHP species are used. The
developmental 	toxicity 	studies 	in 	NHPs 	as 	outlined 	above 	are 	just 	hazard
identification studies; therefore it might be possible to conduct these studies using a
control group and one dose group, provided there is a scientific justification for the
dose level selected. An example of an appropriate scientific justification would be a
monoclonal antibody which binds a soluble target with a clinical dosing regimen
intended to saturate target binding. If such a saturation of target binding can be
demonstrated in the animal species selected and there is an up to 10-fold exposure
multiple over therapeutic drug levels, a single dose level and control group would
provide adequate evidence of hazard to embryo-fetal development.
5.4 	Timing of Studies
If women of child-bearing potential are included in clinical trials prior to acquiring
information 	on 	effects 	on 	embryo-fetal 	development, 	appropriate 	clinical 	risk
management is appropriate, such as use of highly effective methods of contraception
(see ICH M3(R2) Guideline).
For biopharmaceuticals pharmacologically active only in NHPs, where there are
sufficient precautions to prevent pregnancy (see ICH M3(R2) Guideline, Section 11.3,
Paragraph 2), an EFD or ePPND study can be conducted during Phase III, and the
report submitted at the time of marketing application. When a sponsor cannot take
sufficient precaution to prevent pregnancy in clinical trials, either a complete report
of an EFD study or an interim report of an ePPND study should be submitted before
initiation of Phase III (see Note 6). Where the product is pharmacologically active only
in 	NHPs and its mechanism of action raises serious concern for embryo-fetal
development, the label should reflect the concern without warranting a developmental
toxicity study in NHPs and therefore administration to women of child-bearing
potential should be avoided.
15

-- 19 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
If the rodent or rabbit is a relevant species, see ICH M3(R2) Guideline for timing of
reproductive toxicity studies. ICH M3(R2) Guideline should also be followed for the
timing of data on fertility for products where rodents are relevant species.
For oncology products which fall within the scope of ICH S9 Guideline, see that
guidance for aspects relating to timing of study conduct.
6. 	CARCINOGENICITY
The 	need 	for 	a 	product-specific 	assessment 	of 	the 	carcinogenic 	potential 	for
biopharmaceutical 	should 	be 	determined 	with 	regard 	to 	the 	intended 	clinical
population and treatment duration (see ICH S1A Guideline). When an assessment is
warranted, the sponsor should design a strategy to address the potential hazard.
This strategy could be based on a weight of evidence approach, including a review of
relevant data from a variety of sources. The data sources can include published data
(e.g., information from transgenic, knock-out or animal disease models, human
genetic diseases), information on class effects, detailed information on target biology
and mechanism of action, in vitro data, data from chronic toxicity studies and clinical
data. 	In 	some 	cases, 	the 	available 	information 	can 	be 	sufficient 	to 	address
carcinogenic potential and inform clinical risk without additional nonclinical studies.
The mechanism of action of some biopharmaceuticals might raise concern regarding
potential for carcinogenicity (e.g., immunosuppressives and growth factors). If the
weight of evidence (see above) supports the concern regarding carcinogenic potential,
rodent bioassays are not warranted. In this case potential hazard can be best
addressed by product labeling and risk management practices. However, when the
weight of evidence is unclear, the sponsor can propose additional studies that could
mitigate the mechanism-based concern (see Part I, Section 4.8).
For 	products 	where 	there 	is 	insufficient 	knowledge 	about 	specific 	product
characteristics and mode of action in relation to carcinogenic potential, a more
extensive assessment might be appropriate (e.g., understanding of target biology
related to potential carcinogenic concern, inclusion of additional endpoints in toxicity
studies).
If the weight of evidence from this more extensive assessment does not suggest
carcinogenic 	potential, 	no 	additional 	nonclinical 	testing 	is 	recommended.
Alternatively, 	if 	the 	weight 	of 	evidence 	suggests 	a 	concern 	about 	carcinogenic
potential, then the sponsor can propose additional nonclinical studies that could
mitigate the concern, or the label should reflect the concern.
The product-specific assessment of carcinogenic potential is used to communicate risk
and provide input to the risk management plan along with labeling proposals, clinical
monitoring, post-marketing surveillance, or a combination of these approaches.
Rodent bioassays (or short-term carcinogenicity studies) with homologous products
are generally of limited value to assess carcinogenic potential of the clinical candidate.
Alternative approaches can be considered as new strategies/assays are developed.
NOTES
Note 1 	Tissue cross-reactivity (TCR) studies are in vitro tissue-binding assays
employing immunohistochemical (IHC) techniques conducted to characterize
binding of monoclonal antibodies and related antibody-like products to
antigenic determinants in tissues. Other technologies can be employed in
place of IHC techniques to demonstrate target/binding site distribution.
16

-- 20 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
A TCR study with a panel of human tissues is a recommended component of
the safety assessment package supporting initial clinical dosing of these
products. However, in some cases the clinical candidate is not a good IHC
reagent and a TCR study might not be technically feasible.
TCR studies can provide useful information to supplement knowledge of
target distribution and can provide information on potential unexpected
binding. Tissue binding per se does not indicate biological activity in vivo. In
addition, binding to areas not typically accessible to the antibody in vivo (i.e.,
cytoplasm) is generally not relevant. Findings should be evaluated and
interpreted in the context of the overall pharmacology and safety assessment
data package.
When there is unexpected binding in human tissues an evaluation of selected
animal tissues can provide supplemental information regarding potential
correlations or lack thereof with preclinical toxicity. TCR using a full panel of
animal tissues is not recommended.
Since a bi-specific antibody product will be evaluated in a TCR study using a
panel of human tissues, there is no need to study the individual binding
components.
Evaluating the tissue binding of homologous products does not provide
additional value when TCR studies have been conducted with the clinical
candidate in a human tissue panel, and is not recommended.
TCR studies cannot detect subtle changes in critical quality attributes.
Therefore TCR studies are not recommended for assessing comparability of
the 	test 	article 	as 	a 	result 	of 	process 	changes 	over 	the 	course 	of 	a
development program.
Note 2 	If two species have been used to assess the safety of the ADC, an additional
short-term study or arm in a short-term study should be conducted in at
least one species with the unconjugated toxin. In these cases a rodent is
preferred 	unless 	the 	toxin 	is 	not 	active 	in 	the 	rodent. 	If 	only 	one
pharmacologically relevant species is available, then the ADC should be
tested in this species. A novel toxicant calls for an approach to species
selection similar to that used for a new chemical entity on a case-by case
approach (e.g., for anticancer products in accordance with ICH S9 Guideline).
For toxins or toxicants which are not novel and for which there is a sufficient
body 	of 	scientific 	information 	available, 	separate 	evaluation 	of 	the
unconjugated toxin is not warranted. Data should be provided to compare the
metabolic stability of the ADC in animals with human.
Note 3 	The species-specific profile of embryo-fetal exposure during gestation should
be 	considered 	in 	interpreting 	studies. 	High 	molecular 	weight 	proteins
(>5,000 D) do not cross the placenta by simple diffusion. For monoclonal
antibodies with molecular weight as high as 150,000 D, there exists a specific
transport mechanism, the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) which determines
fetal exposure and varies across species.
In the NHPs and humans, IgG placental transfer is low in the period of
organogenesis and begins to increase in early second trimester, reaching
highest levels late in the third trimester. (5) Therefore, standard embryo-
fetal studies in NHPs, which are dosed from early pregnancy up to Gestation
Day 50, might not be of value to assess direct embryo-fetal effects in the
period of organogenesis, although effects on embryo-fetal development as an
indirect result of maternal effects can be evaluated. Furthermore, maternal
17

-- 21 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
dosing in NHPs after delivery is generally without relevance as IgG is only
excreted in the milk initially (i.e., in the colostrum), and not later during the
lactation and nursing phase.
Rodents differ from the NHPs and humans, as IgG crosses the yolk sac in
rodents by FcRn transport mechanisms and exposure can occur relatively
earlier in gestation than with NHPs and humans. In addition, delivery of
rodents occurs at a stage of development when the pups are not as mature as
the NHP or the human neonate. Therefore, rat/mouse dams should be dosed
during lactation in order to expose pups via the milk up to at least day 9 of
lactation when the offspring are at an equivalent stage of development as
human neonates.
Note 4 	The minimum duration of post-natal follow-up should be one month to cover
early functional testing (e.g., growth and behaviour).
In general, if there is evidence for adverse effects on the immune system (or
immune function) in the general toxicology studies, immune function testing
in the offspring during the post-partum phase of the enhanced Pre/Post-
Natal 	Development 	(ePPND) 	study 	is 	warranted. 	When 	appropriate,
immunophenotyping can be obtained as early as post-natal day 28. The
duration of post-natal follow-up for assessment of immune function can be 3-
6 months depending on the functional test used.
Neurobehavioural 	assessment 	can 	be 	limited 	to 	clinical 	behavioural
observations. Instrumental learning calls for a training period, which would
result in a post-natal duration of at least 9 months and is not recommended.
Note 5 	A detailed discussion of the approach to determine group sizes in cynomolgus
monkey ePPND studies can be found in Jarvis et al, 2010 (6). Group sizes in
ePPND studies should yield a sufficient number of infants (6-8 per group at
post-natal day 7) in order to assess post-natal development and provide the
opportunity for specialist evaluation if necessary (e.g., immune system).
Most ePPND studies accrue pregnant animals over weeks and months.
Consideration should be given to terminating further accrual of pregnant
animals into the study, and adapting the study design (e.g., by Caesarian
section) when pre-natal losses in a test item group indicate a treatment-
related effect.
Reuse of vehicle-control treated maternal animals is encouraged.
If there is some cause for concern that the mechanism of action might lead to
an effect on EFD or pregnancy loss, studies can be conducted in a limited
number of animals in order to confirm the hazard.
Note 6 	Endpoints to be included in an interim report of an ePPND study in NHPs:
- Dam data: survival, clinical observations, bodyweight, gestational exposure
data (if available), any specific PD endpoints;
- Pregnancy data: number of pregnant animals started on study, pregnancy
status at both the end of organogenesis (gestation day (GD) 50) and at
GD100, occurrence of abortions and timing of abortions. There is no need
for ultrasound determinations of fetal size in the interim report; these are
not considered essential since actual birth weight will be available;
- 	Pregnancy outcome data: number of live births/still births, infant birth
weight, infant survival and bodyweight at day 7 post-partum, qualitative
external morphological assessment (i.e., confirming appearance is within
normal limits), infant exposure data (if available), any specific PD endpoints
in the infant if appropriate.
18

-- 22 of 23 --

Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
19
REFERENCES
1. 	ICH S5(R2) Guideline: Detection of Toxicity to Reproduction for Medicinal
Products and Toxicity to Male Fertility; June 1993.
2. 	ICH S1A Guideline: Guideline on the Need for Carcinogenicity Studies for
Pharmaceuticals; November 1995.
3. 	ICH M3(R2) Guideline: Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct
of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorisation for Pharmaceuticals;
June 2009.
4. 	ICH S9 Guideline: Nonclinical Evaluation for Anticancer Pharmaceuticals;
November 2008.
5. 	Pentsuk N, Van der Laan JW. An interspecies comparison of placental antibody
transfer: 	new 	insights 	into 	developmental 	toxicity 	testing 	of 	monoclonal
antibodies. Birth defects research (Part B) 2009; 86: 328-344.
6. 	Jarvis P, Srivastav S, Vogelwedde E, Stewart J, Mitchard T, Weinbauer G. The
Cynomolgous 	Monkey 	as 	a 	model 	for 	Developmental 	Toxicity 	Studies:
Variability of Pregnancy losses, Statistical power estimates, and Group Size
considerations. Birth Defects Research (Part B) 2010, 89: 175-187.

-- 23 of 23 --

