[SOURCE URL] https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/S7B_Guideline.pdf
[CHARS] 30901

INTERNATIONAL 	CONFERENCE 	ON 	HARMONISATION 	OF 	TECHNICAL
REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE
ICH H ARMONISED TRIPARTITE G UIDELINE
THE N ON -CLINICAL E VALUATION OF THE P OTENTIAL FOR DELAYED
V ENTRICULAR R EPOLARIZATION
(QT I NTERVAL P ROLONGATION)
BY H UMAN P HARMACEUTICALS
S7B
Current Step 4 version
dated 12 May 2005
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group
and has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the
ICH Process. 	At Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to
the regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan and USA.

-- 1 of 14 --

S7B
Document History
First
Codification History 	Date
New
Codification
November
2005
S7B 	Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2 and
release for public consultation.
7
February
2002
S7B
S7B 	Due to scientific and procedural reasons, the guideline was
revised, re-approved by the Steering Committee and re-
released for public consultation as a Step 2 document.
10
June
2004
S7B
Current Step 4 version
S7B 	Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory
bodies.
12
May
2005
S7B

-- 2 of 14 --

THE N ON - CLINICAL E VALUATION OF THE P OTENTIAL FOR DELAYED
V ENTRICULAR R EPOLARIZATION (QT INTERVAL P ROLONGATION) BY
H UMAN P HARMACEUTICALS
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline
Having reached Step 4 of the ICH Process at the ICH Steering Committee meeting
on 12 May 2005, this guideline is recommended for
adoption to the three regulatory parties to ICH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. 	INTRODUCTION .........................................................................................................1
1.1 	Objective of the Guideline ..............................................................................................1
1.2 	Background .....................................................................................................................1
1.3 	Scope of the Guideline ....................................................................................................2
1.4 	General Principles ..........................................................................................................2
2. 	GUIDELINE ..................................................................................................................2
2.1 	Objectives of S7B Studies...............................................................................................2
2.2 	Considerations for Selection and Design of Studies .....................................................3
2.3 	Non-clinical Testing Strategy ........................................................................................4
2.3.1 	In Vitro I Kr Assay ...............................................................................................4
2.3.2 	In Vivo QT Assay ...............................................................................................4
2.3.3 	Chemical/Pharmacological Class ....................................................................4
2.3.4 	Relevant Non-Clinical and Clinical Information ............................................5
2.3.5 	Follow-up Studies..............................................................................................5
2.3.6 	Integrated Risk Assessment ..............................................................................6
2.3.7 	Evidence of Risk.................................................................................................6
2.4 	Timing of S7B Non-clinical Studies and Integrated Risk Assessment in Relation to
Clinical Development .....................................................................................................6
3. 	TEST SYSTEMS ...........................................................................................................6
3.1 	Considerations for Test Systems ...................................................................................6
3.1.1 	Use of Positive Control Substances and Reference Compounds ......................7
3.1.2 	In Vitro Electrophysiology Studies ...................................................................7
3.1.3 	In Vivo Electrophysiology Studies ....................................................................8
3.1.4 	Simulated Pathological Conditions and Arrhythmias ..................................10
i

-- 3 of 14 --



-- 4 of 14 --

1
THE N ON - CLINICAL E VALUATION OF THE P OTENTIAL FOR DELAYED
V ENTRICULAR R EPOLARIZATION (QT INTERVAL P ROLONGATION)
BY H UMAN P HARMACEUTICALS
1. 	INTRODUCTION
The assessment of the effects of pharmaceuticals on ventricular repolarization and
proarrhythmic risk is the subject of active investigation. When additional data (non-
clinical and clinical) are accumulated in the future, they will be evaluated and this
guideline might be revised.
1.1 	Objective of the Guideline
This guideline describes a non-clinical testing strategy for assessing the potential of a
test 	substance 	to 	delay 	ventricular 	repolarization. 	This 	guideline 	includes
information concerning non-clinical assays and integrated risk assessments.
1.2 	Background
The QT interval (time from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T
wave) of the electrocardiogram (ECG) is a measure of the duration of ventricular
depolarization and repolarization. 	QT interval prolongation can be congenital or
acquired (e.g., pharmaceutical-induced). 	When ventricular repolarization is delayed
and 	the 	QT 	interval 	is 	prolonged, 	there 	is 	an 	increased 	risk 	of 	ventricular
tachyarrhythmia, including torsade de pointes, particularly when combined with
other risk factors (e.g., hypokalemia, structural heart disease, bradycardia). 	Thus,
much 	emphasis 	has 	been 	placed 	on 	the 	potential 	proarrhythmic 	effects 	of
pharmaceuticals that are associated with QT interval prolongation.
Ventricular repolarization, determined by the duration of the cardiac action potential,
is a complex physiological process. 	It is the net result of the activities of many
membrane ion channels and transporters. 	Under physiological conditions, the
functions of these ion channels and transporters are highly interdependent. 	The
activity of each ion channel or transporter is affected by multiple factors including,
but not limited to, intracellular and extracellular ion concentrations, membrane
potential, cell-to-cell electrical coupling, heart rate, and autonomic nervous system
activity. The metabolic state (e.g., acid-base balance) and location and type of cardiac
cell are also important. 	The human ventricular action potential consists of five
sequential phases:
• 	phase 0: The upstroke of the action potential is primarily a consequence of a
rapid, transient influx of Na+ (INa) through Na+ channels;
• 	phase 1: The termination of the upstroke of the action potential and early
repolarization phase result from the inactivation of Na+ channels and the
transient efflux of K+ (Ito) through K+ channels;
• 	phase 2: The plateau of the action potential is a reflection of a balance between
the influx of Ca2+ (ICa) through L-type Ca2+ channels and outward repolarizing
K+ currents;
• 	phase 3: The sustained downward stroke of the action potential and the late
repolarization phase result from the efflux of K+ (IKr and IKs) through delayed
rectifier K+ channels;

-- 5 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
2
• 	phase 4: The resting potential is maintained by the inward rectifier K+ current
(IK1).
Prolongation of the action potential can result from decreased inactivation of the
inward Na+ or Ca2+ currents, increased activation of the Ca2+ current, or inhibition of
one 	or 	more 	of 	the outward 	K+ currents. 	The 	rapidly 	and 	slowly 	activating
components of the delayed rectifier potassium current, IKr and IKs, seem to have the
most influential role in determining the duration of the action potential and thus the
QT interval. The human ether-a-go-go-related gene (hERG) and KvLQT1 gene encode
pore-forming proteins KCNH2 and KCNQ1 that are thought to represent the α-
subunits of the human potassium channels responsible for IKr and IKs, respectively.
These α-subunit proteins can form hetero-oligomeric complexes with auxiliary β-
subunits (i.e. MiRP and MinK gene products), which have been speculated to
modulate 	the 	gating 	properties 	of 	the 	channel 	proteins. 	The 	most 	common
mechanism of QT interval prolongation by pharmaceuticals is inhibition of the
delayed rectifier potassium channel that is responsible for IKr.
1.3 	Scope of the Guideline
This guideline extends and complements the “ICH Guideline on Safety Pharmacology
Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals” (ICH S7A). 	This guideline applies to new
chemical entities for human use and marketed pharmaceuticals when appropriate
(e.g., when adverse clinical events, a new patient population, or a new route of
administration raises concerns not previously addressed). 	Conditions under which
studies are not called for are described in ICH S7A.
1.4 	General Principles
Principles and recommendations described in ICH S7A also apply to the studies
conducted in accordance with the present guideline. In vitro IKr and in vivo QT assays
described in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 when performed for regulatory submission
should be conducted in compliance with good laboratory practice (GLP). 	Follow-up
studies described in Section 2.3.5 should be conducted in compliance with GLP to the
greatest extent feasible.
In vitro and in vivo assays are complementary approaches; therefore, according to
current understanding, both assay types should be conducted.
The investigational approach and evidence of risk should be individualized for the test
substance, depending on its pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic and safety profiles.
2. 	GUIDELINE
2.1 	Objectives of S7B Studies
The objectives of studies are to: 1) identify the potential of a test substance and its
metabolites to delay ventricular repolarization, and 2) relate the extent of delayed
ventricular 	repolarization 	to 	the 	concentrations 	of 	a 	test 	substance 	and 	its
metabolites. The study results can be used to elucidate the mechanism of action and,
when 	considered 	with 	other 	information, 	estimate 	risk 	for 	delayed 	ventricular
repolarization and QT interval prolongation in humans.

-- 6 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
3
2.2 	Considerations for Selection and Design of Studies
Non-clinical methodologies can address the following:
• 	Ionic currents measured in isolated animal or human cardiac myocytes,
cultured cardiac cell lines, or heterologous expression systems for cloned
human ion channels;
• 	Action 	potential 	parameters 	in 	isolated 	cardiac 	preparations 	or 	specific
electrophysiology 	parameters 	indicative 	of 	action 	potential 	duration 	in
anesthetized animals;
• 	ECG parameters measured in conscious or anesthetized animals;
• 	Proarrhythmic effects measured in isolated cardiac preparations or animals.
As indicated above, these four functional levels can be investigated by in vitro and/or
in vivo methods. 	Findings from the functional levels listed above are considered
useful and complementary.
In vitro electrophysiology studies can explore potential cellular mechanisms that
might not be evident from in vivo data. Changes in other cardiovascular parameters
or 	effects 	on 	multiple 	ion 	channels 	can 	complicate 	interpretation 	of 	data.
Complementary assessments in other systems can address this issue. Although delay
of repolarization can occur through modulation of several types of ion channels,
inhibition of IKr is the most common mechanism responsible for pharmaceutical-
induced prolongation of QT interval in humans.
In vivo models that possess the full complement of molecular, biochemical, and
physiological systems can also be informative with regard to the response in humans
to the test substance. 	Carefully designed and conducted in vivo studies allow
evaluation of parent substance and metabolites, and can enable estimation of safety
margins. 	In vivo ECG evaluations provide information on conduction properties and
non-cardiac influences (e.g., autonomic nervous system tone). 	Studies of action
potential parameters provide information on the integrated activity of multiple ion
channels in the heart.

-- 7 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
Integrated Risk
Assessment
Follow-up
Studies
Non-clinical Testing Strategy
In Vitro IKr
Assay
In Vivo QT
Assay
Relevant Non-
clinical and Clinical
Information
Evidence of Risk
Chemical/
Pharmacological
Class
Integrated Risk
Assessment
Follow-up
Studies
Non-clinical Testing Strategy
In Vitro IKr
Assay
In Vivo QT
Assay
Relevant Non-
clinical and Clinical
Information
Evidence of Risk
Chemical/
Pharmacological
Class
2.3 	Non-clinical Testing Strategy
The following sections describe a general non-clinical testing strategy for assessing
risk for delayed ventricular repolarization and QT interval prolongation that is
pragmatic and based on currently available information. 	The figure illustrates the
component elements of the testing strategy, but not specific test systems or their
designs.
2.3.1 	In Vitro IKr Assay
An in vitro IKr assay evaluates the effects on the ionic current through a native or
expressed IKr channel protein, such as that encoded by hERG (see section 3.1.2).
2.3.2 	In Vivo QT Assay
An in vivo QT assay measures indices of ventricular repolarization such as QT
interval (see section 3.1.3). 	This assay can be designed to meet the objective of both
ICH S7A (cardiovascular core battery study) and S7B. 	This will reduce the use of
animals and other resources.
2.3.3 	Chemical/Pharmacological Class
Consideration 	should 	be 	given 	to 	whether 	the 	test 	substance 	belongs 	to 	a
chemical/pharmacological class in which some members have been shown to induce
QT interval prolongation in humans (e.g., antipsychotics, histamine H-1 receptor
antagonists, fluoroquinolones). 	This factor should, where appropriate, influence the
choice of reference compound(s) and be included in the integrated risk assessment.
4

-- 8 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
5
2.3.4 	Relevant Non-Clinical and Clinical Information
Additional information for the integrated risk assessment can include results from:
• 	Pharmacodynamic studies;
• 	Toxicology/safety studies;
• 	Pharmacokinetic studies, including plasma levels of parent substance and
metabolites (including human data if available);
• 	Drug interaction studies;
• 	Tissue distribution and accumulation studies;
• 	Post-marketing surveillance.
2.3.5 	Follow-up Studies
Follow-up 	studies 	are 	intended 	to 	provide 	greater 	depth 	of 	understanding 	or
additional knowledge regarding the potential of test substance for delayed ventricular
repolarization and QT interval prolongation in humans. 	Such studies can provide
additional information concerning potency, mechanism of action, slope of the dose-
response curve, or magnitude of the response. 	Follow-up studies are designed to
address specific issues, and, as a result, various in vivo or in vitro study designs can
be applicable.
In circumstances where results among non-clinical studies are inconsistent and/or
results of clinical studies differ from those for non-clinical studies, retrospective
evaluation and follow-up non-clinical studies can be used to understand the basis for
the discrepancies. Results from follow-up studies can be a significant component of an
integrated risk assessment.
Relevant non-clinical and clinical information along with the following should be
considered in the selection and design of follow-up studies:
• 	Use 	of 	ventricular 	repolarization 	assays 	that 	measure 	action 	potential
parameters in isolated cardiac preparations (see section 3.1.2);
• 	Use of specific electrophysiological parameters indicative of action potential
duration in anesthetized animals (see section 3.1.3);
• 	Repeated administration of test substance;
• 	Selection of animal species and gender(s);
• 	Use of metabolic inducers or inhibitors;
• 	Use of concurrent positive control substances and reference compounds (see
section 3.1.1);
• 	Inhibition of other channels not previously evaluated;
• 	Measurement of electrophysiological parameters at multiple time points;
• 	Confounding effects in conscious animals that limit the interpretation of data
such as test substance-induced effects on heart rate or autonomic tone, or
toxicities such as tremor, convulsion, or emesis.

-- 9 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
6
2.3.6 	Integrated Risk Assessment
The 	integrated 	risk 	assessment 	is 	the 	evaluation 	of 	non-clinical 	study 	results
including the results from follow-up studies and other relevant information. 	The
integrated risk assessment should be scientifically based and individualized for the
test 	substance. 	Such 	an 	assessment 	can 	contribute 	to 	the 	design 	of 	clinical
investigations and interpretation of their results. When available, the integrated risk
assessment should be included in the Investigator’s Brochure and the Non-clinical
Overview (ICH M4). Depending on the stage of drug development, the integrated risk
assessment should also consider:
• 	Assay sensitivity and specificity;
• 	Potencies of test substance in S7B assays relative to reference compound(s);
• 	Relationship between the exposures associated with an effect on repolarization
and those eliciting the primary pharmacodynamic effect in the non-clinical test
species or the proposed therapeutic effect in humans;
• 	Contribution of metabolites to QT interval prolongation as well as metabolic
differences between humans and animals.
2.3.7 	Evidence of Risk
Evidence of risk is the overall conclusion from the integrated risk assessment for a
test substance to delay ventricular repolarization and prolong QT interval in humans.
2.4 	Timing of S7B Non-clinical Studies and Integrated Risk Assessment in
Relation to Clinical Development
Conduct of S7B non-clinical studies assessing the risk for delayed ventricular
repolarization and QT interval prolongation prior to first administration in humans
should be considered. 	These results, as part of an integrated risk assessment, can
support the planning and interpretation of subsequent clinical studies.
3. 	TEST SYSTEMS
3.1 	Considerations for Test Systems
This section provides an overview of methodologies currently used to assess the
potential for a test substance to delay ventricular repolarization and to prolong QT
interval. 	The following should be considered in selecting the most appropriate test
systems:
• 	Assay methodology and experimental endpoints are scientifically valid and
robust;
• 	Assays and preparations are standardized;
• 	Results are reproducible;
• 	Endpoints/parameters of the assays are relevant for assessing human risk.

-- 10 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
7
3.1.1 	Use of Positive Control Substances and Reference Compounds
A sub-maximally effective concentration of a positive control substance should be used
to demonstrate the responsiveness of in vitro preparations for ion channel and action
potential duration assays and should be included in every study. In the case of in vivo
studies, positive control substances should be used to validate and define the
sensitivity of the test system, but need not be included in every study.
For test substances belonging to a chemical/pharmacological class that is associated
with 	QT 	interval 	prolongation 	in 	humans, 	the 	use 	of 	concurrent 	reference
compound(s) (member(s) of the same class) in in vitro and in vivo studies should be
considered to facilitate ranking the potency of the test substance in relation to its
comparators.
3.1.2 	In Vitro Electrophysiology Studies
In vitro electrophysiology studies can provide valuable information concerning the
effect of a test substance on action potential duration and/or cardiac ionic currents.
These assays have an important role in assessing the potential for QT interval
prolongation and elucidating cellular mechanisms affecting repolarization. 	In vitro
electrophysiology studies employ either single cell (e.g., heterologous expression
systems, disaggregated cardiomyocytes) or multicellular (e.g., Purkinje fiber; papillary
muscle; trabeculae; perfused myocardium; intact heart) preparations. 	Heterologous
expression systems, where human ion channel protein(s) are expressed in noncardiac
cell lines, are used to assess the effects of a test substance on a specific ion channel.
Disaggregated 	myocytes 	are 	technically 	more 	challenging 	than 	the 	expression
systems but have the advantage of being suitable for assessing effects on both action
potential duration and ionic currents. 	Although single cell preparations are more
fragile, they minimize diffusional barriers to the site of action. 	Multicellular
preparations are stable test systems to study action potential duration. The analysis
of parameters for each phase of the action potential such as Vmax for phase 0 (INa),
APD30 or APD40 for phase 2 (ICa) and “triangulation” for phase 3 (IK) can be useful to
investigate the effects on specific channels responsible for these phases. In addition,
some parameters derived from the Langendorff preparation have been reported to
provide information regarding proarrhythmic risk.
Tissue and cell preparations for in vitro assays are obtained from different laboratory
animal species including rabbit, ferret, guinea pig, dog, swine, and occasionally from
humans. 	The ionic mechanisms of repolarization in adult rats and mice differ from
larger species, including humans (the primary ion currents controlling repolarization
in adult rats and mice is Ito); therefore, use of tissues from these species is not
considered appropriate. 	Species differences in terms of which cardiac ion channels
contribute to cardiac repolarization and to the duration of the action potential should
be considered in selecting a test system. 	When native cardiac tissues or cells are
used, the characteristics and source of the preparation should be considered because
the distribution of ion channel types varies according to the region and type of cell.
Test substance concentrations for in vitro studies should span a broad range, covering
and exceeding the anticipated maximal therapeutic plasma concentration. Ascending
concentrations 	should 	be 	tested 	until 	a 	concentration-response 	curve 	has 	been
characterized or physicochemical effects become concentration-limiting. 	Ideally, the
duration of exposure should be sufficient to obtain steady-state electrophysiological

-- 11 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
8
effects, unless precluded by the viability of the cell or tissue preparation. 	The
duration of exposure should be indicated. 	Appropriate positive control substances
should be used to establish the sensitivity of the in vitro assay system.
Factors that can confound or limit the interpretation of in vitro electrophysiology
studies include the following:
• 	The testing of high concentrations of the test substance can be precluded by
limited solubility in aqueous physiological salt solutions;
• 	Adsorption to glass or plastic or non-specific binding to the test matrix can
reduce the concentration of the test substance in the incubation or perfusion
medium;
• 	Test substance concentrations can be limited by cytotoxic or physicochemical
attributes of the test substance that disrupt cell membrane integrity so that
electrophysiological endpoints cannot be obtained;
• 	Cardiac cells and tissues have limited capacity for drug metabolism; therefore,
in vitro studies using the parent substance do not provide information on the
effects of metabolites. 	When in vivo non-clinical or clinical studies reveal QT
interval prolongation that is not consistent with data from in vitro studies
using the parent substance, testing metabolites in the in vitro test systems
should be considered.
New technologies for potassium channel assays are being developed. 	Novel ion
channel activity assays can be useful in preliminary screening of test substances to
identify lead candidates. 	It is important to demonstrate concordance between
conventional and new technologies before adopting new technologies for regulatory
purposes.
Competition binding protocols, in which test substances are studied for their ability to
displace a radiolabeled hERG channel blocker from a cell line expressing hERG, are
used. 	However, competition for radioligand-binding sites provides no information on
agonistic or antagonistic effects of the test substance on IKr. Moreover, this assay will
not identify test substances that bind to hERG at sites other than the radioligand
binding sites. 	Based upon these potential limitations, this assay is not considered a
substitute for voltage clamp assays described above.
3.1.3 	In Vivo Electrophysiology Studies
Intact animal models allow investigation of ventricular repolarization or associated
arrhythmias where integrated effects on the full complement of ion channel and cell
types are assessed. 	Also, potential neuronal and hormonal influences on the
pharmacodynamic effect of the pharmaceuticals are present in animals.
The QT interval of the ECG is the most commonly used endpoint to gauge effects of a
test substance on ventricular repolarization. In specialized electrophysiology studies,
information 	regarding 	the 	ventricular 	repolarization 	(e.g., 	monophasic 	action
potential duration and effective refractory period) can also be obtained from in vivo
models. 	Additional safety parameters of interest, including blood pressure, heart
rate, PR interval, QRS duration, and arrhythmias, can be assessed simultaneously.
The QT interval and heart rate have an inverse, non-linear relationship, which varies
among species and between animals within a species. 	Thus, a change in heart rate

-- 12 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
9
exerts an effect on QT interval, which can confound the assessment of the effect of the
test substance on ventricular repolarization and the QT interval. 	There are two
important situations where there is variability in heart rate among animals: one is
due to difference in autonomic tone, and the other is due to effects of test substances
on heart rate. 	Therefore, the interpretation of data from in vivo test systems should
take into account the effect of coincident changes in heart rate. 	Ideally, QT interval
data obtained after administration of a test substance should be compared with
control and baseline data at similar heart rates. 	When the heart rate variability is
not due to the test substance, it can be reduced by acclimatization, or the use of
anesthetized animal models. 	When the effects are due to a test substance, the most
common approach is to correct the QT interval for heart rate (QTc) using formulae
such as Bazett or Fridericia. 	The choice of heart rate correction formula should be
justified with data from the test system. 	When differences in heart rate between
treatment and control are large, the correction formulae may not be effective for
assessing risk of QT interval prolongation. An alternative approach is to maintain a
constant heart rate using cardiac pacing. 	An analysis of QT/RR relationship,
including correction of the QT interval using formulae for individual animals, may be
more appropriate.
Laboratory animal species used for in vivo electrophysiology studies include dog,
monkey, swine, rabbit, ferret, and guinea pig. The ionic mechanisms of repolarization
in adult rats and mice differ from larger species, including humans (the primary ion
currents controlling repolarization in adult rats and mice is Ito); therefore, use of these
species is not considered appropriate. The most appropriate in vivo test systems and
species should be selected and justified.
The dose range should be in accord with that discussed in ICH S7A and, whenever
feasible, should include and exceed the anticipated human exposure. The dose range
can be limited by animal intolerance to the test substance, e.g., emesis, tremor, or
hyperactivity. 	For studies designed to relate the extent of delayed ventricular
repolarization to concentrations of the parent test substance and its metabolites,
controlled exposure via constant intravenous infusion can be used. 	Monitoring
exposure to the test substance and metabolites (see ICH S3A) provides opportunities
to interpret dose- and concentration-response data and to design follow-up studies, if
appropriate.
Factors that should be considered in conducting studies and interpreting the results
include the following:
• 	Data acquisition and analysis methods;
• 	Sensitivity and reproducibility of the test systems;
• 	Dosing period and measurement points;
• 	Heart rate and other effects that confound interpretation of QT interval data;
• 	Inter-species 	and 	gender 	differences, 	e.g., 	cardiac 	electrophysiology,
hemodynamics, or metabolism of pharmaceuticals;
• 	Pharmaceuticals that have effects on several ion channels can yield complex
dose-response relationships that could be difficult to interpret.

-- 13 of 14 --

The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval
Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
10
3.1.4 	Simulated Pathological Conditions and Arrhythmias
The 	precise 	relationship 	between 	test 	substance-induced 	delay 	of 	ventricular
repolarization and risk of proarrhythmia is not known. 	Directly assessing the
proarrhythmic risk of pharmaceuticals that prolong the QT interval would be a logical
undertaking. 	Indices of proarrhythmic activity (e.g., electrical instability, temporal
and/or spatial dispersion of refractoriness, reverse use-dependency, changes in action
potential 	configuration) 	and 	animal 	models 	might 	have 	utility 	in 	assessing
proarrhythmia. 	Interested parties are encouraged to develop these models and test
their usefulness in predicting risk in humans.

-- 14 of 14 --

