[SOURCE URL] https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2022/06/test-no-470-mammalian-erythrocyte-pig-a-gene-mutation-assay_8d5eb84f/4faea90e-en.pdf
[CHARS] 138781

Test Guideline No. 470
Mammalian Erythrocyte Pig-a Gene
Mutation Assay
25 June 2025
OECD Guidelines for the
Testing of Chemicals
Section 4
Health effects

-- 1 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
Adopted:
25 June 2025
© OECD (2025)
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/
1
Mammalian Erythrocyte Pig-a Gene Mutation Assay
INTRODUCTION
1. The OECD Test Guidelines for the testing of chemicals are periodically reviewed in light of
scientific progress, changing regulatory needs and animal welfare considerations. Previously, this Test
Guideline included three equal considerations when assessing whether a response is positive or
negative. First, the test chemical response was assessed as to whether there was a statistically
significant increase from the concurrent negative control. Second, the response was evaluated for a
concentration/dose related effect. Third, historical negative control distributions were used to assess
biological relevance. As noted above, the three considerations were given equal weight. However, recent
analyses suggest more nuance and flexibility should be applied to the third consideration (i.e.,
comparison to historical controls). In particular, distributions can only serve as a proxy for normal
biological variation when they are of sufficient quality for this purpose. The changes found herein address
these issues by revising language in the “Evaluation and Interpretation of Results,” and by updating an
associated Annex.
2. The in vivo erythrocyte Pig-a gene mutation assay (hereafter called the Pig-a assay) uses an
endogenous mammalian gene, the phosphatidylinositol glycan class A gene (Pig-a), as a reporter of
somatic-cell gene mutation. In vivo gene mutation tests, such as the Pig-a assay, are especially relevant
for assessing mutagenicity because physiological factors, such as absorption of the test chemical from
the site of exposure, distribution of the test chemical throughout the test system via systemic circulation,
and in vivo metabolism and DNA repair processes, all contribute to the mutagenic responses. For these
reasons, the in vivo Pig-a assay can be used to further investigate genotoxic potential detected by in
vitro systems.
3. The Pig-a assay can be performed with commonly used strains of rats or mice (1) (see paragraph
28) and the test can be conducted without euthanizing the animals. These properties facilitate integration
of the Pig-a assay into many in vivo rodent testing protocols (see paragraphs 8-9 and Annex 2) (2) (3).
4. This Test Guideline (TG) is based on the recommendations included in a Detailed Review Paper
(DRP), which describes the scientific principles, technical conduct, performance, and context of use of
the Pig-a assay (3). In addition, the DRP compares the strengths and weaknesses of the Pig-a assay in
relation to other in vivo genetic toxicology tests (3). The DRP was based on the review by the
International Workshops on Genotoxicity Testing of several Pig-a protocols (2). The main components
and procedures for the Pig-a assay are described below. Further guidance for conducting the test,
OECD GUIDELINES FOR THE TESTING OF
CHEMICALS

-- 2 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
2
including detailed laboratory protocols that are compliant with the recommendations in this TG, can be
found in these and other publications (4) (5) (6) (7).
5. An independent peer review (8) of the Retrospective Performance Assessment conducted on
the in vivo erythrocyte Pig-a gene mutation assay (3) (9) concluded that the test was adequate for
identifying in vivo mutagens with a high degree of accuracy. The review indicated that the test was
sufficiently well validated for the development of a TG used to support regulatory decisions.
6. Definitions of key terms are set out in Annex 1.
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
7. Pig-a gene mutations have been observed to accumulate with repeat dosing of mutagens, and
increased frequencies of mutant erythrocytes generally persist for months in peripheral blood (10) (11)
(12). These observations suggest that the kinetics by which Pig-a mutant cells appear and disappear
from blood circulation are similar to those of Pig-a wild-type cells, indicating that the mutations measured
in the Pig-a assay act as if they have a relatively neutral phenotype, i.e., one that does not confer a cell
growth advantage or disadvantage. Although different dosing regimens have been employed for the test,
a protocol employing 28 consecutive days of dosing (or longer, see paragraph 44) takes advantage of
mutant accumulation, provides sufficient time for mutant expression, and facilitates integrating the test
into standard repeat-dose toxicity studies. The 28-day dosing protocol also has displayed slightly greater
accuracy for detecting weak in vivo mutagens than shorter-term (i.e., less than 14 consecutive days)
dosing protocols (e.g., concordance of 93% and 89% using two sets of criteria vs. 88% using data from
short-term treatments only: see (3) for full discussion). Finally, a 28-day dosing protocol detects some
mutagens at lower (per day) dose levels compared to shorter dosing schedules (13).
8. 3Rs principles (i.e., replacement, reduction, and refinement) and experimental data support
integrating the Pig-a assay with other test(s) whenever possible. However, there are several important
factors that should be considered in order to do so effectively. The recommended procedure for
conducting the Pig-a assay involves 28 consecutive days of dosing followed by testing for Pig-a gene
mutation (paragraph 41). Thus, the test readily integrates into study designs that use such repeat-dosing
schedules, e.g., the 28-day subacute general toxicology studies described in OECD TG 407 (14) and
TG 412 (15), or the transgenic rodent gene mutation test described in OECD TG 488 (16). The Pig-a
assay also can be combined with tests with extended exposure durations, such as the subchronic toxicity
studies described in OECD TG 408 (17) and TG 413 (18). Combination of Pig-a assays with tests having
short-term treatment and sampling schedules is discussed in Annex 2.
9. Under the conditions outlined in paragraph 8 and Annex 2, the Pig-a and erythrocyte
micronucleus tests can be integrated into single experiments, since only small volumes of peripheral
blood are required for each endpoint. Thus, both clastogenicity/aneugenicity (micronucleus test) and
gene mutation (Pig-a assay) can be evaluated in the same study (19). The Pig-a assay also complements
the in vivo comet test (so long as mutant manifestation time is taken into account), since the latter detects
a different type of endpoint (DNA damage in the form of strand breaks) than the Pig-a assay. The comet
test also shows low sensitivity for detecting test substances that induce mutation in the bone marrow
compartment (20), while the Pig-a assay specifically measures mutations induced in bone marrow
erythroid cells (paragraph 11).
10. The Pig-a gene is relatively large (1302 bp of protein-coding sequence in 5 exons). Mutations
that produce the Pig-a mutant phenotype (see paragraph 16) have been detected throughout the coding
region and flanking splice-site sequences, without any major hot-spots for mutation (21) (22) (23) (24).

-- 3 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
3
Most of the mutations detected by the test have been base-pair substitutions and frameshifts, including
mutations resulting in exon deletions, without any known bias as to the nature of the mutations detected.
11. The erythrocyte Pig-a assay detects mutations induced in erythroid precursor cells, which in
adult rodents are primarily found in the bone marrow. Because the bone marrow is a well-perfused tissue,
many substances that induce mutations in other tissues, induce mutation in the bone marrow as well.
The assay is sensitive to both test chemicals that are direct-acting mutagens and test chemicals that
require metabolic activation to induce mutation (i.e., promutagens). However, the Pig-a assay is not
applicable for assessing the mutagenicity of test chemicals or their metabolites that do not reach the
bone marrow (see paragraph 75). In general, the Pig-a assay described in this TG cannot investigate
genotoxicity at the site of first contact.
12. Analyses of Pig-a gene mutation spectra have been conducted by DNA sequence analysis of
Pig-a mutant phenotype erythroid precursor cells from the bone marrow of rodents dosed with known
mutagens. Findings from these studies indicate that Pig-a mutant phenotype cells contain Pig-a
mutations while Pig-a wild-type cells do not (21) (22) (23) (24).
13. Although this TG is applicable only to rodent blood erythrocyte-based Pig-a assays, Pig-a
mutations can be detected in vitro, in cultured mammalian cell lines, and in various animal species,
including humans (3) (25) (26) (57) (58). Analogous measurements in the peripheral blood of other
mammalian species may be feasible and eventually valuable, provided adequate sensitivity and
specificity to detect mutagenic and non-mutagenic substances have been demonstrated.
14. Most peer-reviewed Pig-a assay data are from rats. Mouse data collected to date (1) (25)
indicate this species also can be used for the assay (3). However, several characteristics of mouse-
based tests, including the low circulating blood volume in mice relative to rats, should be taken into
consideration when designing studies in mice (e.g., see paragraph 57).
15. The most appropriate in vivo methods for testing manufactured nanomaterials may be tests that
can measure effects at the site of contact (27), making the Pig-a assay of lesser relevance for testing
these types of substances. The Pig-a assay, however, may be appropriate for testing the mutagenicity
of manufactured nanomaterials provided that bone marrow or systemic availability of the manufactured
nanomaterials can be demonstrated (e.g., following intravenous treatments) (28) (29).
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST METHOD
16. The protein encoded by the Pig-a gene is necessary for the biosynthesis of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) cell membrane anchors (30). GPI anchors link approximately 150
unique proteins to the exoplasmic surface of mammalian cytoplasmic membranes. Of the approximately
30 genes involved in GPI synthesis, Pig-a is the only gene located on the X-chromosome. As there is
only one X chromosome in males and one functional X chromosome in females, a single mutation has
the potential to inactivate the Pig-a gene product and result in cells deficient in GPI anchors and their
associated GPI-anchored proteins. Thus, male and female animals are equally sensitive to Pig-a mutant
induction (3). Other genes involved in GPI biosynthesis only can be inactivated by mutations in both
alleles, making them less likely targets for GPI inactivation and their mutation less likely to cause GPI
anchor deficiency, which is the mutant phenotype measured by the test (31).
17. Microliter volumes of peripheral blood contain millions of red blood cells (RBC) [e.g., (32)], a few
percent of which are immature erythrocytes, also known as reticulocytes (RET). RET contain residual
amounts of RNA and express surface markers, such as CD71, that are typical of erythroid precursor

-- 4 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
4
cells, whereas mature RBC do not. For the purpose of this guideline, RBC are used to signify all
circulating erythrocytes, irrespective of age, while RET refers to the most immature fraction of circulating
erythrocytes. RET can be discriminated from mature RBC based on their residual RNA and/or presence
of the CD71 surface marker using appropriate fluorescent dyes or antibodies.
18. Peripheral blood RBC and RET can be analysed by flow cytometry for the Pig-a mutant
phenotype (i.e., loss of GPI anchors) by labelling with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies against GPI-
anchored proteins (33) (34) (35). Thus, Pig-a mutant cells will be non-fluorescent with regard to GPI-
anchored epitope(s), and Pig-a wild-type cells will fluoresce. In this way, millions of labelled RBC and
RET can be tested for the Pig-a mutant phenotype using flow cytometry. As noted in paragraphs 24-26
and 61, methods that concentrate RET and/or mutant cells have been developed to make evaluating
million(s) of cells per sample practical.
19. Both the RET and total RBC populations should be evaluated for the mutant phenotype.
Increased frequencies of mutant reticulocytes (MUT RET) appear sooner in peripheral blood circulation
compared to mutant erythrocytes (MUT RBC). Even so, it is important to enumerate MUT RBC in addition
to MUT RET because MUT RBC represent an important confirmatory, lagging indicator of mutation. The
demonstration of mutant manifestation in both cohorts of erythrocytes represents the strongest evidence
of test chemical-induced mutagenic activity (see paragraph 68), and the dosing/blood collection
schedules described herein (see paragraphs 41-46) were designed to provide sufficient time for both
MUT RET and MUT RBC to be increased by exposure to mutagenic substances. Indeed, statistically
significant increases in only one population, MUT RET or MUT RBC, is a rare occurrence when rodents
are exposed to known mutagenic substances and when a 28-day repeat-dose protocol is utilised.
However, since mutations are assayed at only one or a few sampling times, it is conceivable that positive
MUT RET, but not MUT RBC responses could occur for a late arising RBC mutant frequency or that
negative responses are detected stochastically in one or the other erythrocyte cohort. Such results
benefit from expert evaluation for establishing the mutagenicity of the test chemical.
20. In addition to collecting data on Pig-a mutant induction, the fraction of RET among total RBC
can be used as a measure of toxicity to the erythroid cell compartment. Percent RET (%RET) data can
be useful for establishing that the bone marrow has been exposed to biologically significant levels of the
test chemical or its metabolites ((2) (7); see also paragraphs 50 and 56). When blood samples are
collected within approximately 3 days following cessation of dosing, bone marrow toxicity often manifests
as a reduction in %RET relative to %RET in concurrent vehicle/solvent control animals. However, it is
important to note that when blood samples are collected later than approximately 3 days following
cessation of dosing, bone marrow toxicity can at times be expressed as elevated %RET relative to
concurrent vehicle/solvent control animals (36). Elevated %RET following dosing is colloquially referred
to as a ‘rebound effect’ or ‘stress erythropoiesis’, and usually represents a compensatory response to a
period of bone marrow toxicity, especially involving reduced erythropoiesis. Finally, dose-related
changes in %RET may occur if the test chemical causes haemolysis (37). Whatever the cause, dose-
related changes in %RET indicate systemic exposure at biologically significant levels.
VERIFICATION OF LABORATORY PROFICIENCY
Training and proficiency investigations
21. Before laboratories conduct the Pig-a assay for regulatory safety assessments, it is important
for staff to gain experience with blood collection, blood labelling and flow cytometric procedures. To

-- 5 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
5
minimise the number of animals required for the preliminary training exercises, reconstruction
experiments, also known as spiking experiments, can be conducted as described in Annex 3 (38).
22. Establishing laboratory proficiency requires reproducing the expected results from published
data (1). This should be demonstrated for both MUT RBC and MUT RET frequencies using a minimum
of two mutagens (including weak responses induced by low doses of mutagens; see Table 1) and with
compatible vehicle/solvent controls (see paragraph 32). These experiments should use doses of
mutagens that give reproducible and dose-related increases in mutant frequency and demonstrate the
sensitivity and dynamic range of the test system using the methods employed in the laboratory. Note
that by collecting and analysing pre-dosing blood samples (see also paragraph 47) along with
vehicle/solvent control samples from rodents used in these proficiency experiments, laboratories can
begin building up their historical negative control data base (described in more detail in paragraph 23
and Annex 4, section 4.1).
Table I. Recommended Mutagens for Training and Proficiency Testing.
Chemicala Cas No. Vehicle Route
Highest Suggested
Rat Doseb
(mg/kg/day)
Highest
Suggested Mouse
Doseb (mg/kg/day)
Blood
Collection
Dayc
N-Ethyl-N-
Nitrosourea, also
known as ENUd
759-73-
9
Phosphate-
buffered
saline, pH
6.0
Oral
gavage
20 40 15-30
Benzo[a]pyrene, also
known as B[a]Pe
50-32-8 Sesame oil
or Corn oil
Oral
gavage
125 125 15-30
7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]-
anthracene, also
known as DMBAe
57-97-6 Sesame oil
or Corn oil
Oral
gavage
30 75 15-30
aOther mutagens can be used if justified.
bGenerally well-tolerated, highly mutagenic dose level assuming 3 consecutive days of administration (Days 1-3) (11) (39).
cBlood collection day describes a range of recommended days for collecting peripheral blood for the Pig-a assay with the days relative to the
start of dosing (i.e., Day 1).
dPotent direct-acting mutagen; pH 6 phosphate-buffered saline should be used to dissolve ENU in order to inhibit hydrolysis; the ENU dosing
solution(s) should be prepared fresh each day of use; commercial supplies of ENU have large amounts of stabilisers and this needs to be
accounted for when preparing dosing solution(s).
eRequires metabolic activation.
Historical negative control data
23. During the course of the proficiency investigations, each laboratory should establish historical
negative control distributions for MUT RET and MUT RBC frequencies. Negative control data can be
obtained from two sources. First, negative control data can be derived from animals tested as negative
controls in conjunction with animals dosed with test chemicals (hereafter referred to as concurrent
negative controls). These animals typically will be dosed with the solvent/vehicle alone (paragraph 32).
Secondly, for laboratories that conduct pre-dosing Pig-a assays (paragraph 47), negative control data
can be obtained from these untreated, naïve animals (referred to as pre-dose control data). Pre-dose
animals have been shown to have Pig-a mutant frequencies equivalent to solvent/vehicle concurrent
control animals when tests are conducted soon after a 28-day repeat-dose treatment protocol, as
recommended in this TG (3). Whatever the source(s) of negative control data, animals that exhibit
exceptionally high mutant cell frequencies (e.g., identified by an outlier test) should not be used to

-- 6 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
6
construct negative control distributions, as they may have experienced a jackpot-type mutational event
(as defined in paragraph 47 and Annex 1). Negative control data and the distribution of the negative
control data are important for determining the minimum number of cells that should be evaluated for the
mutant phenotype (paragraph 61), and assessing test acceptability (paragraph 65). Furthermore,
depending on the quantity and quality of the underlying data, negative control data and the distribution
of the negative control data may also be useful for evaluating and interpreting test chemical-related
effects (paragraphs 67-72). More detailed recommendations for developing historical negative control
datasets, and evaluating their quality, are given in Annex 4, sections 4.1 and 4.4, respectively.
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD
Intellectual property considerations
24. Some of the specific techniques used for assessing the mutagenic DNA-damaging potential of
an agent and for evaluating the effects of an agent that may modify mutagenic DNA damage based on
GPI-anchor-deficient erythrocytes are patented by Litron Laboratories in the U.S., Canada, and Europe.
Note that this patent protection does not cover the principle of the assay or the general design of scoring
GPI negative cells. Laboratories implementing the test method can obtain kits for cell analysis from Litron
(commercially known as MutaFlow® kits) or ship blood samples to a proficient laboratory for testing with
a Litron kit. MutaFlow kits come with a limited-use license, and a signature is not necessary. Alternatively,
laboratories that do not purchase a kit from Litron or an authorised kit distributor must sign a license
agreement with Litron Laboratories to perform the techniques covered by the patents in the U.S.,
Canada, and Europe.
25. The PIGRET method including the immunomagnetic separation for reticulocyte enrichment is
patented by Teijin Limited in Japan only, and requires signing a license with Teijin to use this technique
in Japan.
26. This TG describes the requirements and important characteristics of erythrocyte-based analysis
of Pig-a mutation. In regions where patents apply, protocols using alternative techniques, that do not
infringe upon the patents held by Litron Laboratories or Teijin Limited, may be conducted freely using
the guidance provided by this TG. The use of Litron or Teijin patented techniques are not necessary to
conduct a valid test as long as the acceptability criteria (paragraph 65) are fulfilled.
Preparations
Selection of animal species
27. Common laboratory strains of healthy young adult rats and mice are normally used (i.e., 6-12
weeks old at the start of dosing). Slightly younger or older animals are also acceptable (e.g., 4 weeks of
age at the start of treatment). However, such deviations should be justified. Justification could include
facilitating integration with other tests or to avoid killing animals that have been bred but not used in a
procedure. Provision should be made for any alterations to the historical negative control data base such
deviations in age may cause. Strains of rats and mice such as Han Wistar, Sprague-Dawley and Fisher
344 rats and CD-1 mice have been used extensively (1). The choice of rodent species and strain should
be based on (i) the animals used in other toxicity studies (to be able to correlate data and to facilitate
integration), (ii) animals that developed tumours in a carcinogenicity study (when investigating the mode
of action for carcinogenesis), or (iii) animals with the most relevant metabolism for humans, if known.

-- 7 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
7
Animal housing and feeding conditions
28. The temperature in the experimental animal room ideally should be 22oC (±3oC). The relative
humidity ideally should be 50-60%, being at least 30% and preferably not exceeding 70% other than
during room cleaning. Lighting should be artificial, the sequence being 12 hours light, 12 hours dark. For
feeding, conventional laboratory diets may be used with ad libitum drinking water. The choice of diet may
be influenced by the need to ensure a suitable mixture of a test chemical when administered by the diet.
Animals should be group housed in small groups of the same sex; animals may be housed separately if
scientifically justified. For group caging, no more than five animals should be housed per cage.
Furthermore, cages should conform with animal welfare standards [e.g., (40)]. Based on Animal Care
and Use Committee (or equivalent) recommendations, solid floors should be used wherever possible
and appropriate environmental enrichment should be provided.
Preparation of animals
29. Animals are randomly assigned to solvent/vehicle control and test chemical dosing groups. The
animals are identified uniquely and acclimated to the laboratory conditions for a least five days (or as
prescribed by the applicable Animal Care and Use Committee or equivalent) before the start of dosing.
The least invasive method of uniquely identifying animals should be used. Appropriate methods include
ringing, tagging, micro-chipping and biometric identification. Toe and ear clipping are not scientifically
justified for these tests. Cages should be arranged in such a way that possible effects due to cage
placement are minimised. At the commencement of the study, the weight variation for each sex should
not exceed ±20% of the mean weight.
Preparation of doses
30. Solid test chemicals should be dissolved or suspended in appropriate solvents or vehicles (e.g.,
water, corn oil; see (3) for examples) or mixed in diet or drinking water prior to dosing of the animals.
Liquid test chemicals can be dosed directly, if necessary; however, dilution with an appropriate vehicle
should be used to generate different doses and maintain a consistent dose volume among the treatment
groups. For inhalation exposures, test chemicals can be administered as a gas, vapour, or solid/liquid
aerosol, depending on their physicochemical properties (15) (18).
31. Fresh preparations of the test chemical should be employed unless stability data demonstrate
the acceptability of the storage conditions used.
Test conditions
Solvent/vehicle
32. The solvent/vehicle should not produce toxic effects at the dose volumes used and should not
be suspected of chemical reactions with the test chemicals. If other than well-known solvents or vehicles
are used, their inclusion should be supported with reference data indicating their non-reactivity with the
test chemical, and their compatibility in terms of test animals, route of administration, and endpoint. It is
recommended that wherever possible, the use of aqueous solvents/vehicles should be considered first.

-- 8 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
8
Controls
Positive controls and flow cytometry standards
33. Laboratories will have established their proficiency for conducting the Pig-a assay as described
in paragraphs 21-22. It is only in this context that the inclusion of concurrent positive control animals are
not required for each test. Rather than relying on mutagen-exposed animals, biological flow cytometry
standards are included in each analysis (paragraph 34) and represent a useful type of analytical control
that is 3Rs-friendly and focuses quality assurance measures on important factors that demonstrate the
reliability of a study (2) (7) (11). Specifically, the use of blood-based flow cytometry standards ensures
that i) blood collection and cell staining/labelling were performed properly, ii) the reagents used to
stain/label cells were effective, and iii) the flow cytometer adequately differentiated mutant phenotype
cells from wild-type cells. Finally, in order to assure continued proficiency in detecting increases in mutant
frequency, laboratories should occasionally (at least once per year) perform additional tests with
mutagen-treated animals similar to the proficiency studies described in paragraph 22.
34. Given their importance, it is necessary that biological flow cytometry standards be made and
used each time Pig-a mutant analyses are conducted. For this purpose, a “mutant mimic” (i.e., a blood
sample prepared to have the properties of mutant erythrocytes when tested) or comparable sample (see
Annex 5) is prepared that demonstrates the light scatter and fluorescence characteristics of MUT RET
and MUT RBC versus wild-type RET and wild-type RBC. Mutant mimics can be created by processing
extra blood from a solvent/vehicle concurrent control animal; a portion of the blood is prepared normally
for evaluating Pig-a mutant frequencies, but another portion is prepared by omitting the fluorescent
antibody(s) for GPI-anchored proteins from the fluorescent antibody labelling protocol (11) (38). To make
the standards, these two blood samples are then mixed in approximately equal proportion. Since
standards created from mutant mimics (or the alternative described in Annex 5) are valuable for guiding
instrumentation settings and software/data analysis parameters, as well as serving as a control on the
adequacy on the analytical procedure (paragraph 33), they should be generated for every study, and
used each day blood samples are analysed. Once established, instrument settings generally should
remain unchanged for all samples processed for mutant analysis throughout that particular data
acquisition session.
Negative controls
35. Concurrent negative control animals should be included at every sampling time and
otherwise handled in the same way as animals in the dosing groups, except for not being dosed with the
test chemical. If a solvent/vehicle is used in administering the test chemical, the control group should
receive the same solvent/vehicle. The MUT RET and MUT RBC frequencies from concurrent negative
control animals of a given study should be consistent with the historical negative control distribution.
There are several valid approaches for calculating lower and upper bound limits that can be used to
facilitate such comparisons, and they are described in Annex 4, section 4.2.
36. The requirement for analysing blood from concurrent solvent/vehicle control animals at every
sampling time also applies to studies that include the collection and analysis of pre-dose blood samples
(paragraph 47). That is, pre-dose blood samples are not a substitute for concurrent solvent/vehicle
controls, irrespective of the statistical approach(es) utilised.

-- 9 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
9
PROCEDURE
Number and sex of animals
37. It is technically feasible to conduct the Pig-a gene mutation assay using blood from animals of
either sex (3). Where human exposure to the test chemical may be sex specific, as for example with
some pharmaceuticals, the test should be performed with the appropriate sex.
38. When performing a single-sex study, group sizes at study initiation (and during establishment of
laboratory proficiency) should be established with the aim of providing a minimum of 6 analysable
animals [for justification of group size, see statistical power calculation in (41)]. Thus, a study conducted
with one sex according to the parameters established in paragraph 48, with three dose groups and a
concurrent negative control, would require 24 animals at the start of dosing. The number of animals will
be higher when pre-dose blood samples are used to eliminate outliers as described in paragraph 47, or
when additional animals are included to accommodate unforeseen events that reduce the number of
animals. Sound scientific judgement should be used in interpreting the data in situations where the
number of animals in any group is less than 6 (e.g., due to excluding an animal with a jackpot mutation
response).
39. When data demonstrate relevant differences for the test chemical between males and females
(e.g., differences in systemic toxicity, metabolism, and bioavailability, including in a range-finding study),
it is preferable to perform a study using both sexes.
40. For studies that treat the two sexes with different dose levels, the number of animals required
per sex is the same as indicated in paragraph 38, at least 6 males and 6 females per group. For studies
that treat sexes with the same dose levels, it is often possible to reduce the number of animals per group
by taking advantage of a factorial design (see Annex 4 section 2.1). The factorial statistical design is
capable of maintaining adequate statistical power while using fewer animals of each sex.
Dosing schedule and sampling times
41. A 28-day repeat-dose protocol is recommended for conducting the Pig-a assay. Of the dosing
schedules published and analysed to date, 28-day repeat-dose schedules offer the most compelling
evidence that a negative test result for mutation is accurate [e.g., has the highest percent negative
predictivity (3)]. Alternate dosing schedules can be utilised, if scientifically justified (see paragraph 46).
Test chemicals may be administered as a sin g le d ose per d ay or as a split dose, i.e., two or
more exposures on the same day, to facilitate administering a large volume.
42. When animals are exposed to a test chemical for 28 consecutive days, blood should be collected
at least once, within hours to day(s) of cessation of exposure (e.g., Day1 28-31). Data collected from
testing diverse genotoxicants suggest that sampling on Day 28-31 gives sufficient time for manifestation
of MUT RET and MUT RBC responses and that the exact timing of sample collection is not critical. This
schedule has the advantage of facilitating integration of the Pig-a assay with commonly utilised general
toxicology studies and other genetic toxicology tests (paragraphs 8-9). Note that an extra administration
of the test chemical on Day 29, followed by sample collection several hours later, is permissible for
facilitating tissue harvest for conducting the in vivo comet test.
1 Here and elsewhere, study day is relative to start of dosing, which is defined as Day 1.

-- 10 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
10
43. Optionally, and when logistically feasible, there may be merit to conducting Pig-a analyses on
blood samples collected from a 28-day repeat-dose protocol at an additional, later time point. For
instance, some toxicology experiments include satellite “recovery” or “withdrawal” groups to evaluate
whether toxic effects are diminished or increased upon discontinuation of dosing. Such blood samples
are typically collected between 2 to 4 weeks after cessation of dosing, and represent an opportunity to
evaluate erythrocytes for the Pig-a mutant phenotype after additional time for mutant manifestation.
44. When the dosing period exceeds that of a 28-day repeat-dose study (e.g., 90-day subchronic
studies), blood samples should be collected at least once, after approximately 28 days of dosing (e.g.,
at Day 28-31). As explained in paragraph 43, there may be merit to collecting blood later in the
experimental protocol, (e.g., within a few days of cessation of dosing), but recognizing the possibility that
clonal expansions of erythroid precursor cells may disproportionately affect mutant frequencies at
extended sampling times [e.g., (42)]. In addition, sampling of animals at much later times (e.g., sampling
animals that are ≥8 months of age) may require developing an historical negative control data base for
older animals (see Annex 4, section 4.1).
45. Dosing schedules that involve fewer than 28-consecutive days of exposure (e.g., dosing on one
or three consecutive days) should be scientifically justified as they exhibit lower sensitivity than repeat-
dose, 28-day treatment protocols for detecting mutagens (paragraph 7). If a short-term treatment
protocol is used, blood collection and analyses should occur at least two times: at approximately Day
15, and again at approximately Day 30. Test sensitivity for detecting mutagens is anticipated to be higher
for short-term dosing schedules that involve two post-dosing blood collection/analysis times as opposed
to one (13).
46. Other dosing and sampling schedules may be used when scientifically justified, especially in
instances when they facilitate integration with other toxicology studies, or combination with other
genotoxicity tests. For instance, protocols that do not involve daily dosing but do use several
administrations of test chemical per week for several weeks have been shown to retain high Pig-a assay
sensitivity while facilitating combination with other genotoxicity tests (43). As above, such studies need
to take into consideration the different manifestation times of MUT RET and MUT RBC responses and
the manifestation times for any other genotoxicity tests being conducted as part of the study (see
discussion in Annex 2, section 2 regarding combining Pig-a assays with short-term treatment schedules
with other short-term genetic toxicology assays).
47. Whatever the dosing schedule, it may be advantageous (but not required) to perform Pig-a
analyses before the first administration of the test chemical. Pre-dosing samples are taken within one
week prior to test chemical dosing (if adult mice are used, it is recommended that pre-dose sampling be
conducted ~7 days prior to dosing to allow the haemopoietic system to re-establish homeostasis).
Mutation ‘jackpots’, resulting in mutant frequencies that are unusually high and outside the historical
negative control distribution (see Annex 4, section 4.2 for approaches for describing the distribution),
may occur due to mutations in germ cells or in early erythroid progenitor cells. It may be useful to identify
animals having such mutant frequencies so that they can be excluded from the main study and replaced
with animals having mutant frequencies within the historical negative control distribution.
Dose groups and dose levels
48. A minimum of three test chemical dosing groups and a negative control group generally should
be used. Additional dose groups may be necessary for a detailed analysis of dose-response (see
paragraph 49); the use of fewer dose groups should be justified. Except for d o s i n g with the test
chemical, animals in the concurrent negative control group should be handled in an identical manner to

-- 11 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
11
animals in the test chemical groups. If a solvent/vehicle is used in administering the test chemical, the
concurrent control group and all dosed groups should receive an equal volume of the vehicle or solvent.
49. Any existing toxicity and toxicokinetic data for the test chemical should be taken into consideration
in setting dose levels. If a preliminary range-finding study is performed because there are insufficient
suitable data already available to guide dose selection, it should be performed in the same laboratory,
using the same strain, source, sex, and treatment route to be used in the main study. The highest dose
level should be chosen with the aim of inducing toxic effects but not death or severe suffering [see (44)].
This definition is taken from TG 407 (14) and is used here to facilitate integration of the Pig-a endpoint
with other repeat-dose studies, thereby maximising the toxicological information acquired. When limited
by other factors, such as palatability for dietary or drinking water administration (and when dosing cannot
be done by gavage) or explosiveness for test chemicals administered by inhalation, the highest dose
level will be the maximum feasible dose. Thereafter, a descending sequence of dose levels should be
selected with a view to demonstrating any dose-related response. Two- to four-fold intervals are frequently
used for setting the descending dose levels when genotoxicity endpoints are evaluated. With most test
chemicals, the dose levels used should cover a range from the maximum to little or no toxicity. When
additional toxicity endpoints are integrated into the study, other dose spacing may be considered. The
addition of a fourth test group is often preferable to using excessively large spacing between doses.
50. The highest dose also may be defined as a dose that produces toxicity to the bone marrow
compartment (see paragraph 20). When this evidence is provided by a reduction in mean %RET
(relative to the mean concurrent solvent/vehicle control, measured e.g., with blood sampled 1-3 days
after a 28-day dosing schedule), the reduction should be statistically significant, but ideally it should not
exceed 80%. This is because new erythrocytes need to be generated in order to manifest a chemical-
induced effect in this test.
51. For test chemicals that do not produce toxicity, or that are not limited by other factors (see
paragraph 49), the highest dose for dosing protocols of > 14 consecutive days is 1000 mg/kg/day, while
the maximum for protocols involving shorter-term dosing is 2000 mg/kg/day.
Limit test
52. As noted above, studies normally should employ three test chemical dosing groups and a
solvent/vehicle concurrent control group. However, if from assessment of other data, no observable toxic
effects (including no depression of bone marrow proliferation or other evidence of target tissue cytotoxicity)
would be expected at the highest test dose of 1000 mg/kg body weight/day in a study of > 14 days of
dosing or 2000 mg/kg/day in studies employing <14 days of dosing (paragraph 51), and if genotoxicity
would not be expected based upon in vitro genotoxicity studies or data from structurally related substances,
then this one dose level can be used. In the case of inhalation exposures, the limit test concentrations are
20 mg/L, 5 mg/L or 20,000 ppm for vapours, dusts/mists (aerosols) and gases, respectively. Limit test
doses may not apply in cases where human exposure indicates the need to use a higher dose level (15).
Also, when integrating or combining the Pig-a assay with other test(s), the applicability of using a single
limit dose to these other test(s) should be ensured before conducting a limit test. For instance, the single
limit dose provision does not include TG 489 for which the full 3-dose regimen applies (45).
Administration of doses
53. The primary concern in choosing a route of administration is ensuring exposure of the target
tissue, bone marrow; however, the anticipated route of human exposure also should be considered.

-- 12 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
12
Therefore, routes of exposure such as oral (by gavage), dietary, drinking water, topical, subcutaneous,
intravenous, inhalation, intratracheal, or implantation may be chosen as justified. Intraperitoneal injection
is generally not recommended since it is not a usual route of human exposure and only should be used
with specific scientific justification. If the test chemical is mixed in diet or drinking water, especially in the
case of single or short-term dosing, care should be taken to ensure that the delay between food and
water consumption and blood sampling provide time for mutant manifestation (see paragraphs 41-46).
54. The maximum volume of liquid that can be administered by gavage or injection at one time
depends on the size of the test animal. The volume should not normally exceed 1 mL/100 g body weight
except in the case of aqueous solutions where a maximum of 2 mL/100 g may be used. The use of
volumes greater than this should be justified and all volumes should be consistent with applicable Animal
Care and Use Committee (or equivalent) guidelines. Except for irritating or corrosive test chemicals,
which will normally produce exacerbated effects at higher concentrations, variability in test volume
should be minimised by adjusting the concentration to ensure administration of a constant volume in
relation to body weight at all dose levels.
Observations
55. General clinical observations of the test animals should be made, and clinical signs recorded at
least once each day, preferably at the same time(s) and considering the peak period of anticipated effects
after dosing (44). At least twice each day all animals should be observed for morbidity and mortality. All
animals should be weighed at least once each week, and when they are euthanised. Quantitative
measurements of food consumption should be made at least weekly when test chemicals are
administered in the diet; general observations of food consumption should be made to ascertain animal
health. If the test chemical is administered via the drinking water, water consumption should be
measured at each change of water and at least weekly. Animal Care and Use Committee (or equivalent)
guidelines should be observed; but in general, animals exhibiting non-lethal indicators of excess toxicity
should be euthanised prior to completion of the test period.
Target tissue exposure
56. A blood sample should be taken at appropriate times(s) in order to permit measuring the plasma
levels of the test chemical and/or its metabolite(s) for the purposes of demonstrating that exposure of
the bone marrow occurred and where other exposure data do not exist (e.g., significant perturbations to
%RET, see paragraphs 20 and 50; see paragraph 75 for further discussion). The blood sample should
be large enough to detect relevant levels of the test chemical and its metabolites without perturbing the
biological processes being measured in the animals. The bone marrow is well perfused by the peripheral
blood circulation, receiving up to 15% of the cardiac output, and measurement of plasma levels of the
test chemical and its metabolites is considered qualitative evidence for exposure of bone marrow (46)
(47) (48) (49).
Blood collection for conducting the Pig-a assay
57. Applying animal welfare standards, small volumes of peripheral blood (less than about 300 μl)
are obtained either using a method that permits survival of the test animal, such as bleeding from
the tail vein, jugular vein, or other appropriate blood vessel, or by cardiac puncture or sampling from a
large blood vessel when the animal is humanely killed. The size of the animal and animal welfare

-- 13 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
13
standards may limit the options for the method used. As flow cytometric analysis requires single cell
suspensions, care should be taken to avoid blood coagulation; this is normally accomplished using an
anticoagulant, such as heparin and/or EDTA. Samples should be collected and processed blinded as to
the treatment or by employing a blocked design (Annex 4, section1).
Storage of blood
58. In the presence of anticoagulant, blood samples can be stored for up to 5 days before they are
processed for flow cytometric analysis as long as they are maintained cold, but not frozen (e.g., in a 2-
8°C refrigerator) (2). Furthermore, in the presence of anticoagulant, blood samples can be shipped to an
analytical test site provided they are maintained cold, not frozen, throughout transportation and any
subsequent storage, and as long as they are further processed and analysed within approximately 5
days of collection (2). Whatever storage and/or shipment method is utilised, each laboratory should
develop their own data to support it.
59. Procedures have been described for freezing and later thawing blood samples for subsequent
processing and flow cytometric analysis of Pig-a mutations (50). These procedures can be useful for
delaying analysis for reasons that include but are not limited to instrument failure, deferring the decision
to acquire Pig-a data, and storing blood from mutagen-treated animals for use as analytical standards
(Annex 5). Furthermore, frozen blood samples can be transported from the animal experimental site to
an analytical site as long as they are maintained frozen throughout transportation (e.g., on dry ice) (50).
Whatever freezing and thawing method is employed, it is important to demonstrate minimal lysis of
RBCs, and that the freezing and thawing process and the length of storage have minimal impact on MUT
RET, MUT RBC, and %RET frequencies.
Methods of measurement
60. Flow cytometric analysis is used for determining %RET, MUT RET and MUT RBC frequencies
in peripheral blood samples.
61. Proficient laboratories have shown that for commonly used rodent models, mean baseline MUT
RET and MUT RBC frequencies typically range from just under 1 x 10-6 up to approximately 3 x 10-6.
With this in mind, it is generally necessary for most laboratories to evaluate a minimum of 1 to 3 x 106
RBC and 1 to 3 x 106 RET per animal per time point. Note that given the rarity of RET in peripheral blood
circulation, it is not practical to evaluate ≥1 x 106 RET directly from blood samples. In order to overcome
this problem, immunomagnetic separation procedures were developed (51) (52) to increase the number
of RET (and in some cases the number of RBC) investigated for mutant cell frequency measurements.
These immunomagnetic separation techniques, or a validated alternative, can be used to facilitate
conducting the Pig-a assay.
62. Each laboratory should set the number of cells analysed to minimise the occurrence of zero
mutant cell frequency readings. Even so, it is possible that for a particular study, more than an occasional
zero mutant cell frequency reading will be observed. In order to avoid this possibility, the number of cells
evaluated per animal may be increased by processing left-over blood samples that have been stored
properly (paragraphs 58-59). However, when circumstances do not permit such additional
processing/scoring, it should be the case that the occurrence of zero MUT RBC values will usually be
very rare, owing to the assay’s ability to evaluate many times more MUT RBC compared to MUT RET.
Thus, when conducting a study with 28 consecutive days of test chemical treatment, a low incidence of

-- 14 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
14
zero readings in the MUT RBC population should be considered sufficient to offset concerns with the
number of zero MUT RET readings in a particular study.
63. The preferred antibodies for scoring the incidence of MUT RET and MUT RBC are anti-CD59
for rats and anti-CD24 for mice, which target the GPI-anchored proteins CD59 and CD24, respectively.
Other GPI-anchored proteins exist on the surface of wild-type RBCs (e.g., CD55) that potentially could
be used in the test, and it also is possible to use combinations of antibodies for GPI-anchored proteins
to distinguish wild-type and mutant phenotype cells (e.g., anti-CD59 plus anti-CD55). Alternative
antibodies or combinations of antibodies for identifying Pig-a mutant and wild-type erythrocytes can be
used if they generate known Pig-a responses (1) and upon demonstration of proficiency by the laboratory
(see paragraph 22).
DATA AND REPORTING
Treatment of results
64. Individual animal data, as well as group means and a measure of within-group variation (e.g.,
standard deviation or standard error), should be presented in tabular form. The number of RET, RBC,
MUT RET, and MUT RBC scored should be listed separately for each animal and time point analysed,
and they should be accompanied by RET, MUT RET, and MUT RBC frequencies for each individual animal.
Whereas RET frequency is usually expressed as a percentage, it is preferable to express MUT RET
frequency as number of MUT RET per 1 million total RET, and MUT RBC frequency as the number of
MUT RBC per 1 million total RBC. Data on animal toxicity and clinical signs also should be reported.
Statistical evaluation and interpretation of results
Acceptability criteria
65. For a valid test, data analysis is conducted only when the study fulfils all acceptability criteria in
terms of animal number, dosing, sampling times, mutant analysis, etc. described in paragraphs 37-63.
The following criteria determine the acceptability of the test:
• The concurrent negative control frequencies are consistent with the distribution described by the
laboratory historical negative control data base. It is important that the historical negative control
data base was constructed appropriately (for instance as recommended in paragraph 23 and
Annex 4, section 4.1), and the historical negative control mutant frequencies and their distribution
are consistent with literature values (1) (3) (7).
• When they are used, concurrent positive controls should induce a statistically significant increase
compared to the concurrent negative control (see paragraphs 35-36).
• Mutant mimic controls or historical samples from animals treated with a positive control substance
were used for setting flow cytometer gates for experimental sample evaluations as described in
paragraph 34 and Annex 5.
• The number of dose levels, route of exposure, and the criteria for the selection of the highest dose
are consistent with those described in paragraphs 48-52.
• The appropriate numbers of MUT RBC and MUT RET have been analysed (paragraph 61).

-- 15 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
15
Evaluation and interpretation of results
66. Data from Pig-a experiments are generally evaluated with the intention of determining whether
the frequencies of MUT RET and MUT RBC in test chemical dosing groups are increased relative to
those of the concurrent solvent/vehicle control group. Such analyses should be accomplished by
appropriate statistical methods, using the animal as the experimental unit. The statistical method(s)
employed should be indicated.
67. When evaluating the responses, all data should be taken into consideration and, in all cases,
sound scientific judgement applied.
68. Providing that all acceptability criteria above are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered positive
if both criteria a and b, below, are met in any of the experimental conditions examined:
a) At least one of the treatment groups exhibits a statistically significant increase in both MUT
RET and MUT RBC frequency compared with the concurrent negative control; and
b) The mutant frequency responses are dose-related, for example when evaluated with an
appropriate trend test (Annex 4) (not applicable to the limit test)
Criteria a- and b-type analyses, both of which are based on concurrent negative control data, are
considered the statistical analyses of primary importance for interpreting study data. Historical negative
control data and their distribution may also be useful for contextualising the results of the current study.
However, this comparison carries less weight than criterion a or b. Furthermore, the degree to which
historical control data are useful for this purpose is highly dependent on the quantity and quality of the
underlying data. For instance, historical control data cannot serve as a useful comparator (e.g., as a proxy
for normal biological variation), when inter-study variation represents the predominant source of variation.
This and other concepts surrounding the appropriate use of historical control data are provided in Annex
4. Thus, only to the degree historical negative control data have been generated in sufficient quantity, and
these data are deemed of sufficient quality, that in addition to criteria a and b, a third criterion, c, can be
applied as follows:
c) At least one of the treatment groups exhibits MUT RET and MUT RBC frequencies
exceeding the upper bound limit derived from the historical negative control data distribution
for at least one post-treatment time point.
The upper bound limit derived from the historical negative control distribution should be
determined using a method appropriate to the quantity and quality of the laboratory’s data
(e.g., control charts, tolerance intervals, or quantiles), with justification provided in the study
report. As inter-laboratory variability may influence the control distribution, no fixed
numerical value can be prescribed, and laboratories should define their upper bound limits
in a scientifically sound and transparent manner, as described in Annex 4.
In many instances, the frequencies being considered will be the current study’s mean values
compared to a distribution derived from historical negative control mean values. However,
there are situations that make historical negative control data and related distributions based
on individual animal data useful; for example, when historical control values are low in
number, or when it is of interest to estimate sources of variation. As explained in more detail
in Annex 4, in these cases it is important to make appropriate comparisons. Specifically, a
distribution based on individual animal data should not be used as a comparator for the
current study’s treatment group means. Rather, a distribution based on individual animal
data should only be used as a comparator for the current study’s individual animal data. This
requirement is referred to as a “like to like” comparison in Annex 4.

-- 16 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
16
Positive results indicate that, under the test conditions, the test chemical induces Pig-a gene mutations
in the erythropoietic cells of the test species.
69. Providing that all acceptability criteria above are fulfilled, and bone marrow exposure to the test
chemical and/or its metabolites occurred (see paragraph 75), a test chemical is considered negative if
both criteria a and b, below, are met in all experimental conditions examined:
a) No treatment group exhibits a statistically significant increase in either MUT RET or MUT
RBC frequency compared with the concurrent negative control; and
b) None of the mutant frequency responses are dose-related, for example when evaluated by
an appropriate trend test (Annex 4) (not applicable to the limit test).
Criteria a- and b-type analyses, both of which are based on concurrent negative control data, are
considered the statistical analyses of primary importance for interpreting study data. Historical negative
control data and their distribution may also be useful for contextualising the results of the current study.
However, this comparison carries less weight than criterion a or b. Furthermore, the degree to which
historical control data are useful for this purpose is highly dependent on the quantity and quality of the
underlying data. For instance, historical control data cannot serve as a useful comparator (e.g., as a
proxy for normal biological variation), when inter-study variation represents the predominant source of
variation. This and other concepts surrounding the appropriate use of historical control data are provided
in Annex 4. Thus, only to the degree historical negative control data have been generated in sufficient
quantity, and these data are deemed of sufficient quality, that in addition to criteria a and b, a third
criterion, c, can be applied as follows:
c) None of the treatment groups exhibits MUT RET and MUT RBC frequencies exceeding the
upper bound limit derived from the historical negative control data distribution at any of the
post-treatment time points.
The upper bound limit derived from the historical negative control distribution should be
determined using a method appropriate to the quantity and quality of the laboratory’s data
(e.g., control charts, tolerance intervals, or quantiles), with justification provided in the study
report. As inter-laboratory variability may influence the control distribution, no fixed
numerical value can be prescribed, and laboratories should define their upper bound limits
in a scientifically sound and transparent manner, as described in Annex 4.
In many instances, the frequencies being considered will be the current study’s mean values
compared to a distribution derived from historical negative control mean values. However,
there are situations that make historical negative control data and related distributions based
on individual animal data useful; for example, when historical control values are low in
number, or when it is of interest to estimate sources of variation. As explained in more detail
in Annex 4, in these cases it is important to make appropriate comparisons. Specifically, a
distribution based on individual animal data should not be used as a comparator for the
current study’s treatment group means. Rather, a distribution based on individual animal
data should only be used as a comparator for the current study’s individual animal data. This
requirement is referred to as a “like to like” comparison in Annex 4.
Negative results indicate that, under the test conditions, the test chemical does not induce Pig-a gene
mutations in the erythropoietic cells of the test species.
70. Regarding the statistical approaches described in paragraphs 68 and 69 above, it is important
to recognise there is no single correct method of conducting a statistical analysis. A practical approach
is to suggest a particular set of statistical analyses as an example of the sort of evaluations that can be

-- 17 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
17
carried out. This is the context that three types of analyses (a, b, c) described above were presented.
See Annex 4 for information that testing laboratories and regulatory reviewers may find useful when
considering whether a particular statistical analysis is appropriate and whether the data interpretation is
scientifically sound. Whatever statistical approach is used, it is important that it is described in advance
of conducting a study.
71. Especially in those instances when the Criteria being considered (a and b; or a, b and c) are not
all in alignment with respect to positive or negative call, sound scientific judgment should be applied in
an effort to interpret the results as either positive or negative. The application of sound scientific
judgement is consistent with recommendations made by an OECD genotoxicity working group that met
in Ottawa, Canada in 2013 (53). It should also be noted that, in general, criterion c has less weight than
criteria a and b.
72. If the application of sound scientific judgement is unable to resolve whether a response is either
positive or negative, further investigations of the existing experiments may be necessary to establish the
biological relevance of a result. For example, these investigations may include analysing more cells.
73. In rare cases, even after further investigation, if the data preclude concluding whether the test
chemical produced a positive or negative result, the study is deemed equivocal.
74. In some cases, equivocal studies may prompt the need for a repeat experiment using modified
experimental conditions, or changing the test system.
75. As noted in paragraph 69, a negative result is only considered reliable when evidence is provided
that the bone marrow (and/or general circulation) has been exposed to the test chemical and/or its
metabolites. With toxic substances, direct evidence of bone marrow exposure is provided by a
statistically significant change in the fraction of RET among total RBC (%RET; see paragraph 20); in the
absence of such evidence, measurement of the plasma or blood levels of the test chemical and its
metabolites (e.g., using the blood sample described in paragraph 56) can be useful for documenting
exposure. A discussion of this topic is provided by the European Food Safety Agency (54). Alternatively,
ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) data, obtained in an independent study,
using the same dosing route and same species (or a different species, with sound scientific justification),
can be used to demonstrate bone marrow exposure. In general, plasma levels calculated from such
studies can be used for this purpose. In some instances, modelling software programs can assist in
bridging information on blood levels and tissue concentrations and help in extrapolating from one route
to another or from one species to a different species (55). Finally, a weight of evidence approach can be
used to demonstrate systemic and/or bone marrow exposure to the test chemical, e.g., for coloured test
chemicals, a matching urine colour could be an indicator of systemic exposure to the test chemical.
Test report
76. Consistent with Good Laboratory Practice, the test report should include the following
information:
Evidence for laboratory proficiency
Test chemical:
• Source, lot number, and expiration/retest date, if available;
• Physical nature and purity;
• Physicochemical properties relevant to the study;
• Stability of the test chemical, if known;

-- 18 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
18
• For mono-constituent substances: chemical identification, such as IUPAC or CAS name, CAS
number, SMILES or InChI code, structural formula, chemical identity of impurities as appropriate
and practically feasible;
• For multi-constituent substances, substances of unknown or variable composition, complex
reaction products or biological materials (UVBCs) and mixtures: characterization of chemical
identity as far as possible (see above), quantitative occurrence and relevant physicochemical
properties of the constituents;
Test chemical preparation:
• Justification for choice of solvent/vehicle;
• Solubility and stability of the test chemical in the solvent/vehicle, if known;
• Preparation of dietary, drinking water or inhalation formulation, if appropriate;
• Analytical determinations on formulations (e.g., stability, homogeneity, nominal concentrations),
when conducted;
Test animals:
• Species and strain and justification for choice;
• Number, age and sex of animals;
• Cage type, housing conditions, diet, enrichment, etc.;
• Method used to uniquely identify animals;
• Procedure used to form dosing groups;
• Individual weight of animals at the start of the test, including body weight range, mean and standard
deviation for each dosing group;
Test conditions (reference can be made to established/published methods in lieu of detailed descriptions):
• Report whether (yes/no) blinding of the study (or parts of the study) was performed
• Protocol for dose range-finding study, if conducted;
• Rationale for dose level selection;
• Details of test chemical preparation;
• Details on the administration of the test chemical;
• Rationale for route and duration of administration (if other than recommended);
• Methods for analytical determinations of dose, when used;
• Details of food and water composition and quality;
• Methods for the measurement of animal toxicity, including %RET and, where available,
histopathological or clinical pathological analysis, and frequency with which animal observations
and body weights were obtained;
• Methods for the bioanalytical/toxicokinetic analysis (if conducted);
• Details and rationale for the peripheral blood sampling protocol, including pre-dose sampling (if
conducted), and sampling within (if conducted) and after the dosing period, including recovery
sampling (if conducted);
• Methods used for blood collection and storage, if used;
• Method used for humane killing, if part of the study;
• Methods for verifying that the test chemical reached the bone marrow, or general circulation, if
negative results are obtained;

-- 19 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
19
• Methods used for immunomagnetic separation of cells;
• Materials used for quantification of mutant cells, including source and lot of antibody(s) and
immunomagnetic separation reagents;
• Methods used for calculation of mutant frequencies; rationale used for the number of RET and
RBC interrogated for mutation (paragraph 61);
• Methods used for a positive control, if included in the analysis;
• Criteria for acceptability of the study;
Results:
• Data from dose range-finding study, if conducted;
• Animal condition prior to and throughout the test period, including body weight observations and
signs of toxicity for individual animals;
• For dietary or drinking water exposures, dose (mg/kg body weight/day) calculated from
diet/drinking water test chemical concentrations and individual animal consumption;
• Body weight, organ weight, clinical pathology and histopathology for individual animals, if available,
at the conclusion of the study;
• Instrument calibration approach, including descriptions of: gating strategy, how the MUT RET and
MUT RBC scoring regions were constructed (e.g., use of mutant mimics, etc.), and graphical output
from the flow cytometer demonstrating the fluorescent resolution achieved between mutant
erythrocytes (or mutant mimics) and wild-type erythrocytes;
• Pre-dosing data for each animal, if collected, including number of cells and cell equivalents
evaluated, the number of mutant cells observed (MUT RET and MUT RBC), the frequency of
mutant cells (reported as number per million), and %RET. In addition, group means should be
reported and a measure of within group variation (standard deviation or standard error) should be
reported for each proposed dosing group;
• If pre-dosing data were used to eliminate any animals from the main study, provide the rationale;
• From the main study, data from each negative (solvent/vehicle) concurrent control animal and each
dosed animal at each sampling and analysis point, including number of cells evaluated, the number
of mutant cells observed (MUT RET and MUT RBC), the frequency of mutant cells (reported as
number per million) and %RET. In addition, group means and a measure of within group variation
should be reported for each sampling and analysis point. In addition, graphical flow cytometric
output from each sample analysis should be available, upon request;
• Concurrent positive control data, if any, at each analysis time, including number of cells evaluated,
the number of mutant cells observed (MUT RET and MUT RBC), the frequency of mutant cells
(reported as number per million), and %RET. In addition, group means and a measure of within
group variation should be reported for each analysis point. Include any laboratory historical control
data or literature values for comparison;
• Historical negative control data with number of rodent blood specimens clearly specified, statistical
description of the distribution including type of calculation used to generate lower and/or upper
bound limits used to aid data interpretation and justification for its use (see Annex 4), as well as
the time period covered and evidence that the assay is under control during the period covered. A
representative table that captures this and other useful information is provided in Annex 4, section
6;
• Statistical analyses performed to evaluate the effect of the test chemical on MUT RET, MUT RBC
and %RET frequency;
• Data supporting that bone marrow exposure occurred for negative findings (see paragraph 75);

-- 20 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
20
• Criteria for supporting a positive or negative response that are met;
Discussion of the Results:
• Explain how scientific judgement was used in evaluating the results of the test; especially in those
instances when some, but not all, of the criteria are met for a negative or a positive result.
Conclusions:
Provide a concise summary of the study findings, including:
• Whether the test chemical showed evidence of gene mutation under the test conditions;
• An assessment of the biological and statistical relevance of the results;
• Any limitations or uncertainties that may affect the interpretation of the findings.

-- 21 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
21
LITERATURE
1. Shemansky JM, LP McDaniel, C Klimas, SD Dertinger, VN Dobrovolsky, T Kimoto, K Horibata, JE Polli,
RH Heflich (2019) Pig-a gene mutation database. Environ Mol Mutagenesis 60:759-762.
2. Gollapudi BB, AM Lynch, RH Heflich, SD Dertinger, VN Dobrovolsky, R Froetschl, K Horibata, MO
Kenyon, T Kimoto, DP Lovell, LF Stankowski Jr, PA White, KL Witt, JY Tanir (2015) The in vivo Pig-a
assay: A report of the International Workshop on Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT) workgroup. Mutat Res
783:23-35.
3. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2020) The in vivo erythrocyte Pig-
a gene mutation assay - Part 1: Detailed Review Paper and Retrospective Performance Assessment.
Available as Publication 315 [ENV/JM/MONO(2020)6].
4. Chikura S, T Kimoto, S Itoh, H Sanada, S Muto, K Horibata (2019) Standard protocol for the total red
blood cell Pig-a assay used in the interlaboratory trial organized by the Mammalian Mutagenicity Study
Group of the Japanese Environmental Mutagen Society. Genes Environ 41:5. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41021-019-0121-z.
5. Bemis JC, NE Hall, SD Dertinger (2019) Erythrocyte-based Pig-a gene mutation assay. In: A Dhawan,
M Bajpayee (eds), Genotoxicity Assessment: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology,
vol 2031, Humana, NY, NY. pp 29-57. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-9646-9_2.
6. Chikura S, T Kimoto, S Itoh, H Sanada, S Muto, K Horibata (2021) Standard protocol for the PIGRET
assay, a high-throughput reticulocyte Pig-a assay with an immunomagnetic separation, used in the
interlaboratory trial organized by the Mammalian Mutagenicity Study Group of the Japanese
Environmental Mutagen and Genome Society. Genes Environ 43:10. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41021-021-00181-7.
7. Dertinger SD, JA Bhalli, DJ Roberts, LF. Stankowski Jr, BB Gollapudi, DP Lovell, L Recio, T Kimoto, D
Miura, RH Heflich (2021) Recommendations for conducting the rodent erythrocyte Pig-a assay: A report
from the HESI GTTC Pig-a Workgroup. Environ Mol Mutagenesis 62:227-237.
8. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2020) Report of the peer review of
the validation status of the in vivo erythrocyte Pig-a gene mutation assay. Available as Publication 319
[ENV/JM/MONO(2020)10].
9. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2020) The in vivo erythrocyte Pig-
a gene mutation assay - Part 2 - Validation report. Available as Publication 316
[ENV/JM/MONO(2020)7] at: https://one.oecd.org/document/ENV/JM/MONO(2020)7/en/pdf
10. Miura D, VN Dobrovolsky, T Kimoto, Y Kasahara, RH Heflich (2009) Accumulation and persistence of
Pig-A mutant peripheral red blood cells following treatment of rats with single and split doses of N-ethyl-
N-nitrosourea. Mutat Res 677:86-92.
11. Phonethepswath S, D Franklin, DK Torous, SM Bryce, JC Bemis, S Raja, S Avlasevich, P Weller, O
Hyrien, J Palis, JT MacGregor, SD Dertinger (2010) Pig-a mutation: Kinetics in rat erythrocytes following
exposure to five prototypical mutagens. Toxicol Sci 114:59-70.
12. Dertinger SD, SL Avlasevich, DK Torous, JC Bemis, S Phonethepswath, C Labash, K Carlson, J
Mereness, J Cottom, J Palis, JT MacGregor (2014) Persistence of cisplatin-induced mutagenicity in
hematopoietic stem cells: Implications for secondary cancer risk following chemotherapy. Toxicol Sci
140:307-314.
13. Elhajouji A, TT Hove, O O’Connell, H Martus, SD Dertinger (2020) Pig-a gene mutation assay study
design: Critical assessment of 3- versus 28-day repeat-dose treatment schedules. Mutagenesis 35:349-

-- 22 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
22
358. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1093/mutage/geaa014.
14.OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2008) OECD Guidelines for the
testing of chemicals: Repeated dose 28-day oral toxicity study in rodents. Test Guideline 407. Available
at: https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2008/10/test-no-407-repeated-dose-28-day-oral-toxicity-
study-in-rodents_g1gh292f.html
15. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2018) OECD Guidelines on the
testing of chemicals: 28-day (subacute) inhalation toxicity study. Test Guideline 412. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2018/06/test-no-412-subacute-inhalation-toxicity-28-day-
study_g1gh2939.html .
16. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2020) OECD Guideline for testing
of chemicals: Transgenic rodent somatic and germ cell gene mutation assays. Test Guideline 488.
Available at: https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2022/06/test-no-488-transgenic-rodent-somatic-
and-germ-cell-gene-mutation-assays_g1g3404a.html .
17. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2018) OECD Guideline for the
testing of chemicals: Repeated dose 90-day oral toxicity study in rodents. Test Guideline 408. Available
at: https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2018/06/test-no-408-repeated-dose-90-day-oral-toxicity-
study-in-rodents_g1gh2931.html .
18. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2018) OECD Guidelines for the
testing of chemicals: 90-day (subchronic) inhalation toxicity study. Test Guideline 413. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2018/06/test-no-413-subchronic-inhalation-toxicity-90-day-
study_g1gh293b.html .
19. Dertinger SD, S Phonethepswath, D Franklin, P Weller, DK Torous, SM Bryce, S Avlasevich, JC Bemis,
O Hyrien, J Palis, JT MacGregor (2010) Integration of mutation and chromosome damage endpoints
into 28-day repeat dose toxicology studies. Toxicol Sci 115:401-411.
20. Kirkland D, DD Levy, MJ LeBaron, MJ Aardema, C Beevers, J Bhalli, GR Douglas, PA Escobar, CS
Farabaugh, M Guerard, GE Johnson, R Kulkarni, F Le Curieux, AS Long, J Lott, DP Lovell, M Luijten,
F Marchetti, JJ Nicolette, S Pfuhler, DJ Roberts, LF Stankowski Jr, V Thybaud, SK Weiner, A Williams,
KL Witt, R Young (2019) A comparison of transgenic rodent mutation and in vivo comet assay
responses for 91 chemicals. Mutat Res 839:21-35.
21. Kimoto T, K Suzuki, Xm Kobayashi, VN Dobrovolsky, RH Heflich, D Miura, Y Kasahara (2011)
Manifestation of Pig-a mutant bone marrow erythroids and peripheral blood erythrocytes in mice treated
with N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea: Direct sequencing of Pig-a cDNA from bone marrow cells negative for GPI-
anchored protein expression. Mutat Res 723:36-42.
22. Revollo JR, MG Pearce, A Dad, DM Petibone, TW Robison, D Roberts, VN Dobrovolsky (2018)
Analysis of mutation in the rat Pig-a assay: I) Studies with bone marrow erythroid cells. Environ Mol
Mutagenesis 59:722-732.
23. Revollo JR, A Dad, MG Pearce, RA Mittelstaedt, TW Robison, VN Dobrovolsky (2019) Pig-a mutations
in bone marrow erythroblasts of rats treated with 7,12-dimethyl-benz[a]anthracene. Mutat Res
848:503106.
24. Revollo JR, A Dad, MG Pearce, RA Mittelstaedt, A Casildo, RG Lapidus, TW Robison, VN Dobrovolsky
(2020) CD59-deficient bone marrow erythroid cells from rats treated with procarbazine and propyl-
nitrosourea have mutations in the Pig-a gene. Environ Mol Mutagenesis 61:797-806.
25. Olsen A-K, SD Dertinger. CT Krüger, DM Eide, C Instanes, G Brunborg, A Hartwig, A Graupner (2017)
The Pig-a gene mutation assay in mice and human cells: A review. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol

-- 23 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
23
121:78-92. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/bcpt.12806.
26. Bemis JC, RH Heflich (2019) In vitro mammalian cell mutation assays based on the Pig-a gene: A
report of the 7th International Workshop on Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT) workgroup. Mutat Res
847:403028.
27. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2009) Preliminary review of OECD
Test Guidelines for their applicability to manufactured nanomaterials. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/preliminary-review-of-oecd-test-guidelines-for-their-applicability-
to-manufactured-nanomaterials_b1b0e314-en.html .
28. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2014) Genotoxicity of
manufactured nanomaterials: Report of the OECD Expert Meeting. Series on the Safety of
Manufactured Nanomaterials, No. 43 [ENV/JM/MONO(2014)34]. Available at:
https://one.oecd.org/document/ENV/JM/MONO(2014)34/en/pdf .
29. Elespuru R, S Pfuhler, MJ Aardema, T Chen, SH Doak, A Doherty, CS Farabaugh, J Kenny, M
Manjanatha, B Mahadevan, MM Moore, G Ouédraogo, LF Stankowski Jr, JY Tanir (2018) Genotoxicity
assessment of nanomaterials: Recommendations on best practices, assays, and methods. Toxicol Sci
164:391-416.
30. Kinoshita T (2014) Biosynthesis and deficiencies of glycosylphosphatidylinositol. Proc Jpn Acad, Ser B
90:130-143.
31. Dad A, VN Dobrovolsky, RH Heflich, JR Revollo (2020) Molecular analysis of GPI-anchor biosynthesis
pathway genes in rat strains used for the Pig-a gene mutation assay. Mutat Res 858-860:503256.
32. Giknis MLA, CB Clifford (2006) Clinical laboratory parameters for Crl:CD(SD) rats. Charles River
Laboratories. pp 1-18. Available at:
https://www.criver.com/sites/default/files/resources/rm_rm_r_clinical_parameters_cd_rat_06.pdf.
33. Miura D, VN Dobrovolsky, Y Kasahara, Y Katsuura, RH Heflich (2008) Development of an in vivo gene
mutation assay using the endogenous Pig-A gene: I. Flow cytometric detection of CD59-negative
peripheral red blood cells and CD48-negative spleen T-cells from the rat. Environ Mol Mutagenesis
49:614-621.
34. Bryce SM, JC Bemis, SD Dertinger (2008) In vivo mutation assay based on the endogenous Pig-a
locus. Environ Mol Mutagenesis 49:256-264.
35. Phonethepswath S, SM Bryce, JC Bemis, SD Dertinger (2008) Erythrocyte-based Pig-a gene mutation
assay: Demonstration of cross-species potential. Mutat Res 657:122-126.
36. Dertinger SD, S Phonethepswath, SL Avlasevich, DK Torous, J Mereness, SM Bryce, JC Bemis, S Bell,
P Weller, JT MacGregor (2012) Efficient monitoring of in vivo Pig-a gene mutation and chromosomal
damage: Summary of 7 published studies and results from 11 new reference compounds. Toxicol Sci
130:328-348.
37. Kenyon MO, SL Coffing, JI Ackerman, WC Gunther, SD Dertinger, K Criswell, KL Dobo (2015)
Compensatory erythropoiesis has no impact on the outcome of the in vivo Pig-a mutation assay in rats
following treatment with the haemolytic agent 2-butoxyethanol. Mutagenesis 30:325-334.
38. Raschke M, B-W Igl, J Kenny, J Collins, SD Dertinger, C Labash, JA Bhalli, CCM Tebbe, KM McNeil,
A Sutter (2016) In vivo Pig-a gene mutation assay: Guidance for 3Rs-friendly implementation. Environ
Mol Mutagenesis 57:678-686.
39. Labash C, SL Avlasevich, K Carlson, A Berg, DK Torous, SM Bryce, JC Bemis, JT MacGregor, SD
Dertinger (2016) Mouse Pig-a and micronucleus assays respond to N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea,

-- 24 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
24
benzo[a]pyrene, and ethyl carbamate, but not pyrene or methyl carbamate. Environ Mol Mutagenesis
57:28-40.
40. EU (European Union) (2010) Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and the Council of 22
September 2010 on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes. Available at: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2010:276:0033:0079:en:PDF .
41. Dertinger SD, S Phonethepswath, P Weller, S Avlasevich, DK Torous, JA Mereness, SM Bryce, JC
Bemis, S Bell, S Portugal, M Aylott, JT MacGregor (2011b) Interlaboratory Pig-a gene mutation assay
trial: Studies of 1,3-propane sultone with immunomagnetic enrichment of mutant erythrocytes. Environ
Mol Mutagenesis 52:748-755.
42. Mittelstaedt RA, VN Dobrovolsky, JR Revollo, MG Pearce, Y Wang, A Dad, PB McKinzie, H Rosenfeldt,
B Yucesoy, R Yeager, S-C Hu, Y Tang, S Min, H-K Kang, D-J Yang, M Basavarajappa, RH Heflich
(2019) Evaluation of 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) mutagenicity using in vitro
and in vivo Pig-a assays. Mutat Res 837:65-72.
43. Dertinger SD, SL Avlasevich, DK Torous, P Singh, S Khanal, C Kirby, A Drake, JT MacGregor, JC
Bemis (2019) 3Rs friendly study designs facilitate rat liver and blood micronucleus assays and Pig-a
gene mutation assessment: Proof-of-concept with 13 reference chemicals. Environ Mol Mutagenesis
60:704-739.
44. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2000) Guidance document on the
recognition, assessment, and use of clinical signs as humane endpoints for experimental animals used
in safety evaluation. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/guidance-document-on-the-
recognition-assessment-and-use-of-clinical-signs-as-human-endpoints-for-experimental-animals-
used-in-safety-evaluation_9789264078376-en.html .
45. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2016b) OECD Guideline for the
testing of chemicals: In vivo mammalian alkaline comet assay. Test Guideline 489. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2016/07/test-no-489-in-vivo-mammalian-alkaline-comet-
assay_g1g6fb2c.html.
46. US Federal Register (1996) International Conference on Harmonisation; Guidance on specific aspects
of regulatory genotoxicity tests for pharmaceuticals. Vol 61 (no. 80):18198-18202. Department of Health
and Human Services, Food and Drug administration. Available at:
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1996-04-24/html/96-10021.htm.
47. Marenzana M, TR Arnett (2013) The key role of the blood supply to bone. Bone Research 3:203-215.
48. Grüneboom A, I Hawwari, D Weidner, S Culemann et al. (2019) A network of trans-cortical capillaries
as mainstay for blood circulation in long bones. Nature Metabolism 1:236-250.
49. Kirkland D, Y Uno, M Luijten, C Beevers, J van Benthem, B Burlinson, S Dertinger, GR Douglas, S
Hamada, K Horibata, DP Lovell, M Manjanatha, H-J Martus, N Mei, T Morita, W Ohyama, A Williams
(2019) In vivo genotoxicity testing strategies: Report from the 7th International Workshop on
Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT). Mutat Res 847:403035.
50. Avlasevich SL, DK Torous, JC Bemis, JA Bhalli, CC Tebbe, J Noteboom, D Thomas, DJ Roberts, M
Barragato, B Schneider, J Prattico, M Richardson, BB Gollapudi, SD Dertinger (2019) Suitability of long-
term frozen rat blood samples for the interrogation of Pig-a gene mutation by flow cytometry. Environ
Mol Mutagenesis 60:47-55.
51. Dertinger SD, SM Bryce, S Phonethepswath, SL Avlasevich (2011) When pigs fly: Immunomagnetic
separation facilitates rapid determination of Pig-a mutant frequency by flow cytometric analysis. Mutat
Res 721:163-170.

-- 25 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
25
52. Kimoto T, S Chikura, K Suzuki, Xm Kobayashi, Y Itano, K Horibata, M Honma, VN Dobrovolsky, RH
Heflich, D Miura, Y Kasahara (2011) Further development of the rat Pig-a mutation assay: Measuring
rat Pig-a mutant bone marrow erythroids and a high throughput assay for mutant peripheral blood
reticulocytes. Environ Mol Mutagenesis 52:774-783.
53. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). (2017) Overview of the set of
OECD Genetic Toxicology Test Guidelines and updates performed in 2014-2015. Series on Testing
and Assessment, No. 238 – 2nd edition. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/overview-of-
the-set-of-oecd-genetic-toxicology-test-guidelines-and-updates-performed-in-2014-2015-second-
edition_61eca5cd-en.html .
54. EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) Scientific Committee, A Hardy, D Benford, T Halldorsson, M
Jeger, HK Knutsen, S More, H Naegeli, H Noteborn, C Ockleford, A Ricci, G Rychen, V Silano, R
Solecki, D Turck, M Younes, G Aquilina, R Crebelli, R Gürtler, KI Hirsch-Ernst, P Mosesso, E Nielsen,
J van Benthem, M Carfi, N Georgiadis, D Maurici, J Parra Morte, J Schlatter (2017) Scientific Opinion:
Clarification of some aspects related to genotoxicity assessment. EFSA Journal 15:5113. Available at:
https://efsa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.2903/j.efsa.2017.5113 .
55. Shin HK, YM Kang, KT No (2017) Predicting ADME Properties of Chemicals. In: Leszczynski J, A
Kaczmarek-Kedziera, T Puzyn, MG Papadopoulos, H Reis, MK Shukla (eds). Handbook of
Computational Chemistry. Springer, Cham. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27282-
5_59.
56. OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2016) OECD Guideline for the
testing of chemicals: Mammalian erythrocyte micronucleus test. Test Guideline 474. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2016/07/test-no-474-mammalian-erythrocyte-micronucleus-
test_g1g6fb16.html .
57.Torous DK, SL Avlasevich, MG Khattab, A Baig, LJ Saubermann, Y Chen, JC Bemis, DP Lovell, VE
Walker, JT MacGregor, SD Dertinger (2020) Human blood PIG-A mutation and micronucleated
reticulocyte flow cytometric assay: Method optimization and evaluation of intra- and inter-subject
variation. Environ Mol Mutagen 61:807-819.
58.Lawrence R, K Munn, H Naser, L Thomas, H Haboubi, L Williams, S Doak, G Jenkins (2023) The PIG-
A gene mutation assay in human biomonitoring and disease. Environ Mol Mutagen 64:480-493.

-- 26 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
26
Annex 1 - Definitions and acronyms
3Rs = Replacement, reduction, and refinement; these principles provide a framework for performing more
humane animal research
ADME = absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion
Clonal expansion = over-representation of the progeny of a cell in a population, usually due to the
accelerated growth of that cell and its progeny relative to other cells in the population
Confidence interval (CI) = a range of values that is likely to include a population value with a certain
degree of confidence
Control limit = horizontal line(s) drawn on a statistical control chart; these are investigator-defined and
use-case-dependent values; in the field of Quality Control, these values are typically the sample mean ± 3
standard deviations, but some other multiples of the standard deviation can be useful e.g., 2x or 1.96x
Erythrocytes = red blood cells, irrespective of age; for the purposes of this document, this term is
interchangeable with RBC
Erythroid mutagen = a chemical capable of altering the DNA sequence of erythroid cells
Flow cytometry = the determination of the characteristics of a population of cells using a flow cytometer
GPI = glycosylphosphatidylinositol, a type of cell membrane anchor that links approximately 150 unique
proteins to the exoplasmic surface of mammalian cytoplasmic membranes; Pig-a is among the genes
necessary to form GPI anchors
Jackpot mutation = a germ cell mutation or more likely a mutation in a bone marrow erythroid precursor
cell that results in a mutant frequency that is unusually high and outside the historical negative control
distribution
Mutant mimic = erythrocytes that are processed in such a manner that they exhibit the same fluorescence
characteristics as bona fide Pig-a mutant erythrocytes; these cells are often generated by processing extra
blood from a vehicle/solvent control animal and omitting the fluorescent GPI-anchored antibody(s) from
the fluorescent antibody labelling protocol; mutant mimics are valuable for guiding instrumentation settings
and software/data analysis parameters
MUT RBC = mutant red blood cells; for the purposes of this document, the term describes circulating
erythrocytes, irrespective of age, that exhibit the Pig-a mutant phenotype (i.e., loss of GPI anchors)
MUT RET = mutant reticulocytes; for the purposes of this document, the term describes the most immature
fraction of circulating erythrocytes, identified by their residual RNA and/or presence of the CD71 surface
marker, that exhibit the Pig-a mutant phenotype (i.e., loss of GPI anchors)
Negative control = in most instances solvent- or vehicle-dosed groups of animals used to identify
significant substance-related effects in the Pig-a assay. In some instances, e.g., establishing a negative
control data base, pre-dose data may substitute for data from solvent- or vehicle-treated animals
Neutral phenotype = a term used to describe mutant cells that are not highly selected for or against in
vivo, e.g., cells that grow at the same rate as cells from the predominant, wild-type cell population
Pig-a gene = phosphatidylinositol glycan class A gene

-- 27 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
27
Prediction interval = an estimate of an interval in which a future observation will fall, with a certain
probability, given what has already been observed
Promutagen = a chemical requiring structural alteration, usually by enzymatic metabolism, to induce
mutations
Quantile = divisions of a probability distribution or frequency distribution into equal, ordered subgroups,
for example quartiles or percentiles
RBC = red blood cells; for the purposes of this document, it encompasses all circulating erythrocytes,
irrespective of age
RET = reticulocytes (in some contexts called polychromatic erythrocytes), an immature erythrocyte
developed from bone marrow erythroblasts that is identified by its residual RNA and/or presence of the
CD71 surface marker
Residual distribution = residuals are estimates of experimental error obtained by subtracting the
observed responses from the predicted responses; the predicted response is calculated from the chosen
model, after all the unknown model parameters have been estimated from the experimental data;
examining residual distribution is important because it provides information about model assumptions and
appropriateness
Tolerance interval = statistical interval within which, with some confidence level, a specified proportion of
a sampled population falls
UVBC = substances of unknown or variable composition, biological materials or complex reaction products
Variance homogeneity = this is an assumption of most parametric tests including the independent
samples t-test and ANOVA, and states that all comparison groups have the same variance; the
independent samples t-test and ANOVA utilise the t and F statistics respectively, which are generally robust
to violations of the assumption as long as group sizes are equal

-- 28 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
28
Annex 2 - Combination of micronucleus and comet
tests with Pig-a assays
1. Combination of the micronucleus and comet assays with Pig-a assays employing a 28-day dosing
protocol
Micronucleus and comet tests often are conducted hours to day(s) following short-term dosing protocols
(e.g., two or three consecutive days of exposure). However, TG 474 for the in vivo micronucleus test
[OECD, 2016] and TG 489 for the in vivo alkaline comet test [OECD, 2016b] also describe integration of
these genotoxicity tests into longer, repeat-dosing protocols. Thus, these two genotoxicity tests can be
combined with Pig-a assays that use the recommended 28-day repeat-dosing protocol.
Blood sampling for blood-based assays, such as the in vivo micronucleus assay, can be performed early
in the Pig-a repeat-dose treatment schedule (e.g., on Day 4). In addition, the blood-based micronucleus
assay and the comet assay on multiple tissues can be conducted after the 28-day treatment protocol is
complete, often at Day 29, with the addition of a dose on Day 29 prior to tissue harvest for conducting the
comet assay.
2. Combination of micronucleus and comet assays with Pig-a assays employing a short-term dosing
protocol
While it is technically possible to combine the Pig-a assay with the micronucleus and comet assay while
using a single, short-term treatment protocol for the tests, two important considerations should be
addressed. First, when acute dosing schedules are used to generate Pig-a data, such studies should be
accompanied by scientific justification for measuring the Pig-a endpoint as they generally result in the
animals being tested with higher daily doses, but a lower total dose of test chemical than with a 28-day
repeat-dosing protocol. Such treatments generally result in lower Pig-a mutant frequencies than generated
by longer-term treatment schedules. Second, the Pig-a assay requires an extended period for mutant
manifestation - usually a minimum of 2 to 4 weeks [OECD, 2020], which is much longer than the duration
of a short-term treatment comet or micronucleus test.
The following are three possible designs for combining micronucleus and comet assays with Pig-a assays
employing short-term treatments:
1. Use a single set of animals and a single short-term treatment (e.g., 2 or 3 consecutive days of
treatment). Using this protocol, combining the Pig-a assay with micronucleus and/or comet
tests limits the comet and micronucleus tests to blood-based analyses that can be
accomplished without euthanizing the animal. Thus, blood-based micronucleus and comet
tests are conducted following the short-term treatment, and the animals are held for an
additional period (e.g., a total of 28 days) for manifestation of Pig-a mutants. Limiting the
analysis to blood is problematic for the comet test, which has displayed reduced accuracy for
detecting DNA damage in blood [Kirkland et al., 2019]. Thus, using this protocol, the Pig-a
assay combines much more readily with short-term blood-based micronucleus tests than it
does with short-term comet tests.
2. Incorporate a second round of short-term treatment(s) during the final days of the Pig-a mutant
manifestation period. The comet and micronucleus tests, as well as the Pig-a assay, then can
be performed after this second round of short-term exposure(s). Following this protocol, the
Pig-a assay would mainly be measuring mutations induced by the first round of treatment(s),

-- 29 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
29
with the micronucleus and comet tests measuring genotoxicity induced by the second round
of treatment(s). Note that if desired, a blood-based micronucleus test also can be performed
following the first round of short-term treatment(s).
3. A less 3Rs-friendly alternative consists of a single short-term treatment, with half the animals
euthanised shortly thereafter to perform the comet and/or micronucleus tests as described in
TG474 and TG 489. In order to perform the Pig-a assay, the remaining animals are maintained
until later blood collection times, e.g., Day 15 and Day 30 as described in paragraph 45. This
ensures that animals are available that have an adequate time for manifestation of the Pig-a
mutant phenotype.
References for Annex 2, in order of appearance
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2016) OECD Guideline for the testing
of chemicals: Mammalian erythrocyte micronucleus test. Test Guideline 474. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2016/07/test-no-474-mammalian-erythrocyte-micronucleus-
test_g1g6fb16.html.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2016b) OECD Guideline for the testing
of chemicals: In vivo mammalian alkaline comet assay. Test Guideline 489. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2016/07/test-no-489-in-vivo-mammalian-alkaline-comet-
assay_g1g6fb2c.html.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2020) The in vivo erythrocyte Pig-a
gene mutation assay - Part 1: Detailed Review Paper and Retrospective Performance Assessment.
Available as Publication 315 at: http://www.oecd.org/chemicalsafety/testing/series-testing-assessment-
publications-number.htm.
Kirkland D, DD Levy, MJ LeBaron, MJ Aardema, C Beevers, J Bhalli, GR Douglas, PA Escobar, CS
Farabaugh, M Guerard, GE Johnson, R Kulkarni, F Le Curieux, AS Long, J Lott, DP Lovell, M Luijten,
F Marchetti, JJ Nicolette, S Pfuhler, DJ Roberts, LF Stankowski Jr, V Thybaud, SK Weiner, A Williams,
KL Witt, R Young (2019) A comparison of transgenic rodent mutation and in vivo comet assay
responses for 91 chemicals. Mutat Res 839:21-35.

-- 30 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
30
Annex 3 - Animal-friendly training exercises for
learning techniques used in the Pig-a assay
A 3Rs-friendly strategy for learning animal-treatment, blood-collection, blood-processing, and flow-
cytometric analysis techniques used in the Pig-a assay has been described by [Raschke et al., 2016]. For
this strategy, a single rodent is exposed to a known, potent mutagenic chemical, e.g., one listed in Table
1. After an appropriate phenotypic expression time that allows elevated MUT RET and MUT RBC
frequencies to appear in the peripheral blood circulation, blood from the exposed rodent can be collected
along with blood from a sex- and age-matched untreated or vehicle/solvent control animal. A series of
mixtures of the two blood samples is made that contains various amounts of blood from the mutagen-
exposed animal (i.e., spiked samples). After determining MUT RET and MUT RBC frequencies for the
rodent dosed with a mutagen and the negative control rodent, expected (intermediate) frequencies can be
calculated for the spiked samples based on the proportion of blood from the rodent dosed with a mutagen
added to negative control blood. By conducting reconstruction experiments on 2 or more separate
occasions, and with several replicates per spiked sample, staff can be trained on important elements of
the test and the proficiency of staff members can be established by demonstrating good agreement
between observed and expected mutant cell frequencies. Successful completion of spiking experiments
represents a useful, 3Rs-friendly gateway to the laboratory proficiency investigations described in
paragraph 22.
Reference for Annex 3
Raschke M, B-W Igl, J Kenny, J Collins, SD Dertinger, C Labash, JA Bhalli, CCM Tebbe, KM McNeil, A
Sutter (2016) In vivo Pig-a gene mutation assay: Guidance for 3Rs-friendly implementation. Environ
Mol Mutagenesis 57:678-686.

-- 31 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
31
Annex 4 - Statistical analysis and data interpretation
1. Preface
1. This Annex draws partly from an International Workshop on Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT) report
[Dertinger et al., 2023]. For illustrative datasets and detailed method descriptions, readers are
encouraged to review this publication.
2. Statistical analysis methods used in this assay can vary, and this Test Guideline provides three
examples in paragraphs 68 - 69 as practical, non-prescriptive approaches. Alternative methods are
acceptable if justified with sound statistical reasoning. Investigators should document their chosen
methods in a written study or validation plan before starting the study and be prepared to defend their
approach.
3. The statistical approaches below are representative tools for evaluating genotoxicity, but sound
scientific judgement is essential, particularly when statistical analyses exhibit conflicting results. The
application of sound scientific judgement is consistent with recommendations made by an OECD
genotoxicity working group that met in Ottawa, Canada in 2013 [OECD, 2017].
4. Considering the language in Test Guideline paragraphs 68 - 69 and the data evaluation tools
described in this Annex, the following overarching principles should be kept in mind:
i. When concurrent negative control data fulfil study acceptability criteria, they represent the most
important comparator for judging whether a particular test chemical induced a genotoxic effect.
ii. Historical control data can provide useful context for interpreting study results, but this requires
supporting evidence including: a) relevant historical control data that have been generated in
sufficient quantity, and; b) data that accurately describes inter-animal variability.
iii. Historical control data should be visualized before any study comparisons take place; graph(s)
that show the degree to which the data are stable over time are particularly useful.
iv. Qualitative and semi-quantitative assessments of historical control data should be
supplemented with quantitative evaluations including: a) the stability of the data over time, and
b) the degree to which inter-study variation explains the total variability observed.
v. When inter-animal variation is the predominant source of variability, the relationship between
study responses and a historical control-derived interval or upper bounds value (i.e., criterion c)
can be used with a strong degree of confidence in contextualizing the results.
vi. When inter-study variation is the major source of variability, comparisons between study data
and the historical control-derived bounds are less useful, and consequentially, less emphasis
should be placed on using historical control data to contextualize a particular study’s results.
vii. Most statistical tests, including those in this Annex, assume random sampling or blocking to
mitigate uncontrolled factors on study results.
2. Pairwise comparisons
5. One type of statistical test that may be implemented are pairwise comparisons that determine if
the concurrent vehicle/solvent (negative) control group is significantly different from the test chemical
dose groups. Parametric analyses that use analysis of variance (ANOVA) with an appropriate multiple
comparisons test are commonly used, but other methodologies are equally acceptable so long as
assumptions underlying the analyses are met. For example, if data transformation does not result in
homoscedasticity, weighted (variance-corrected) ANOVA and/or t-tests or appropriate non-parametric
methods can be considered.

-- 32 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
32
2.1 Factorial design
6. If more than one sex is used in a study, factorial design approaches are generally advantageous
as it evaluates the effects of sex and test chemical dose simultaneously and examines how these factors
interact. Standard statistical software can be used to analyse the data generated from this design.
7. The analysis first inspects the sex-by-dose interaction term in the ANOVA table. (Note that
statisticians who take a modelling approach such as using General Linear Models may approach the
analysis in a different but comparable way but will not necessarily derive the traditional ANOVA table).
In the absence of a significant interaction term, the combined values across sexes or across dose levels
provide valid statistical tests between the levels based upon the pooled within-group variability term of
the ANOVA.
8. The analysis continues by partitioning the estimate of the between-dose-level variability into
contrasts, which test for linear and quadratic contrasts of the responses across the vehicle/solvent
concurrent control and test chemical dose levels. When there is a significant sex x dose interaction, this
term can be partitioned into linear x sex and quadratic x sex interaction contrasts. These terms test
whether the dose level responses are parallel for the two sexes or there is a differential response between
the two sexes.
9. The pooled within-group variability estimate allows pairwise tests between means, such as
between sexes or dose levels (e.g., against negative (solvent/vehicle) control levels). Where there is
a significant interaction, comparisons can be made between the means of different dose levels
within a sex or sexes within a dose level.
3. Trend test
10. A second type of analysis that may be used is the trend test to identify a dose-response
relationship. For this test, data should be available from the negative control group and all experimental
dose groups. However, trend tests are normally not applicable for Limit Tests, which involve only a single
test chemical dose level as described in paragraph 52). When employing these analyses, care is needed
in interpreting the results. For example, a simple linear trend test may fail to detect a trend if the dose-
response is non-monotonic. In such cases, more advanced tests, like the downturn protection test
proposed by Bretz and Hothorn [2003] may be useful. Creating a graph of the dose response can aid in
choosing the appropriate test or determining if a transformation is needed.
4. Historical negative control data distribution
11. Distributions of historical negative control data are important for determining the minimum
number of cells that should be evaluated and for assessing a particular study’s acceptability and also
when determining whether the results of any test chemical-exposed treatment group exceeds the upper
bounds of the historical negative control data distribution (“criterion c”). Given their importance, guidance
for building historical negative control datasets is provided below.
4.1 Building historical negative control datasets: Group means versus individual animal data
12. There is value in compiling historical negative control data based on both individual animal data
and as study group means. First, individual animal data facilitate certain statistical analyses that cannot

-- 33 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
33
be accomplished with group means. One example is Variance Components Analysis aimed at estimating
the extent to which inter-animal differences versus study-dependent nuisance factors explain the
variation observed in an assay. This important consideration cannot be addressed when analyses are
based on group mean data. Second, initially focusing on individual animal data represents a practical
recommendation because, for some in vivo test systems, it may be difficult to achieve adequately sized
databases with group means due to limitations on animal testing.
13. As a laboratory gains experience and conducts more studies, the historical control databases
can expand to include both individual animal data and group mean data. Individual animal data will
remain essential for evaluating the quality and stability of historical negative control data. However, the
group mean historical negative control data distribution may replace the individual animal data
distribution in the context of criterion c-type assessments.
14. While individual animal- and group mean-based databases are interrelated, intervals for
historical negative control data based on individual animals are wider than those based on group means.
Therefore, a guiding principle is like should be compared to like meaning individual animal results should
be compared with intervals based on individual animal data, while group mean results are most
appropriately compared to intervals based on group means.
4.2 Database size
15. A historical negative control database (HCD) should consist of data from at least ≥ 20
independent studies and ≥ 100 individual animals. These values are consistent with recommendations
by Hayashi et al. [2011] and Igl and colleagues [2019]. A database with < 20 independent studies and <
100 individuals may still be useful but should carry less weight compared to later versions derived from
≥ 20 independent studies and ≥ 100 individual animals.
16. The goal of achieving 20 independent studies and upwards of 100 animals is complicated by the
fact that some endpoints may be affected by certain experimental factors such as species, strain, age,
sex, vehicle composition, etc. For the TGR mutation assay, the tissue being analysed for mutations or
DNA strand breaks should also be considered. When factor(s) are found to appreciably affect the
endpoint in question, separate historical control databases may become necessary, which is an
unrealistically large burden that may result in many small databases that never reach the goal of 100
observations. In these instances, a practical solution may become necessary, for example conducting a
relatively small number of independent experiments, each with 10 animals, and each with a different,
commonly used vehicle. Once these pilot studies are complete, and so long as the data are found to be
“under control” (see Section 4.4, “Evaluating the Quality of Historical Control Data”), an appropriately
calculated historical control interval based on individual animal data may be used for assay acceptability
and addressing criterion c. However, as explained previously, analyses conducted with such data should
carry less weight relative to later databases that are more appropriately sized.
17. In most instances, the historical negative control databases will be generated with data from
animals dosed with the solvent/vehicle alone. For some endpoints, historical negative control databases
can benefit from the inclusion of naïve animal data. This assumes solvent/vehicle effects are not
appreciable. This example stresses the importance of supplementing the historical control genotoxicity
data with the reporting of metadata that includes experimental factors such as animal model, strain, sex,
solvent/vehicle, age at time of tissue harvest, and analytical equipment configuration.
18. Related to this, assuming supporting literature or other data are available, it may be appropriate
to initially consider factor(s) such as sex and/or solvent/vehicle to have no effect on a genotoxicity
endpoint. This helps one more efficiently construct an adequately sized database. However, as more

-- 34 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
34
data accumulate, these assumptions should be re-evaluated, and in this manner decisions about pooling
or parsing of databases can be made on sound scientific reasoning.
4.3 Maintaining historical control databases
19. Historical control data can be from studies conducted under Good Laboratory Practices (GLP)
guidelines, non-GLP studies, or from both, so long as the experimental conditions are similar, and quality
control measures confirm accuracy of data not covered by a GLP-compliance statement. An established
historical control database should be maintained and reissued at some consistent interval, or else by
some other defined triggering event, unless no new data have been generated in the previous 12 months.
While historical control databases may be updated on a predetermined schedule, assay acceptability
criteria must be evaluated on a per study basis allowing for real time feedback on assay performance so
as to be useful for modifying a fixed database update schedule.
20. For example, if a study does not meet assay acceptance criteria, this should trigger work aimed
at identifying the underlying cause(s). If an underlying cause is identified (e.g., an explainable technical
error, reagent issue, or equipment failure), these assay control data should not be used in the next
iteration of the historical control database. For the sake of transparency, such data should be added to
the database, but omitted from the calculation of interval(s) that form the basis of assay acceptability
criteria or for addressing criterion c.
21. If an assay fails assay acceptance criteria and the underlying cause is not identified, then a
decision must be made as to whether the assay control data should be included in a future historical
control database. To maximize transparency, the decision process for excluding control data from a
database should most ideally be articulated a priori. If the unusual control data point(s) are deemed
acceptable for inclusion in a future historical control database because no technical error, etc. was
identified, this should ideally prompt a reissue of the database and associated analyses (e.g., generation
of a control chart, new interval calculation, etc.) ahead of schedule, so that the historical control database
remains representative of upcoming studies.
22. Finally, a timeframe should be selected to analyse the historical control data for stability, such
as 5 years as an upper bound. Accordingly, assay-specific factors will often need to be considered. For
instance, if the assay is conducted infrequently, or a particular tissue is rarely studied, older data may
be used to obtain approximately 20 studies and 100 independent observations, provided there have
been no changes in methodology over the time period.
4.4 Evaluating the quality of historical negative control data
23. To evaluate the quality of HCD, a qualitative and semi-quantitative approach should be taken
[OECD, 2017]. Initial assessments should evaluate whether (i) the genotoxicity data are consistent with
published results from proficient laboratories (here, it can be useful to seek out interlaboratory
validation/transferability-centric papers); (ii) the level of variation across samples within a study and
across studies compare to published results from proficient laboratories; and (iii) there is an obvious drift
to higher or lower frequencies with respect to time. Quantitative analyses should also be applied and
usually begin by characterizing the distribution of the data, which can be useful as residuals that do not
approximate a normal distribution should not support some of the analyses described below.
24. When data transformation is deemed necessary, computational tools may be utilized to select
an appropriate transformation. For instance, the Box-Cox approach available in many statistical software
[Box and Cox, 1964] calculates an estimate of the lambda power parameter, which can be used to
identify an optimal transformation. However, simply rounding lambda to the nearest 0.5 value helps

-- 35 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
35
select from common transformations. For instance, a lambda of -1 = reciprocal, 0 = logarithmic, 0.5 =
square root, 1 = untransformed, and 2 = squared.
25. The next analysis should use statistical tools widely used in the fields of manufacturing and
process control. Control charts are a useful for studying historical control data [Hayashi et al., Mutat.
2011] and are recommended in several genetic toxicology OECD TGs [OECD, 2017]. A control chart is
a graph used to study how a process changes over time. Data are plotted in a sequential order that
reflects when they were collected over time. A control chart has a central line plotted parallel to the X-
axis describing the mean, an upper line for the upper control limit (UCL; mean plus 3 standard deviations,
i.e., sigma +3), and a lower line for the lower control limit (LCL; sigma -3). Graphs can show sigma ±2
lines, which are known as “warning limits.” (Note that standard deviation values plotted on control charts
are not the same standard deviation values from summary statistics of the sample; rather, control chart
standard deviation values are estimated by the average range divided by a normalizing constant, d2, see
Dertinger et al., 2023). By comparing current data to these lines, conclusions can be drawn about
whether a process is consistent (“under control”) or variable (“out-of-control”).
26. Different types of control charts with different objectives may be useful for genetic toxicology
data are briefly described here. I-charts can be used with either continuous or discrete (count) data and
are time-ordered sequence charts that plot individual values on the y-axis and the order of the individuals
on the x-axis. C-charts also plot individual values where no attempt is made to take into consideration
any grouping that may exist in the data. The primary difference between I- and C-charts is that the latter
are restricted to counts (numbers of events) and assume an underlying Poisson distribution. X-bar charts
are plots of the means derived from a series of experiments, each of which is made up of several
individuals (e.g., the mean of 5 animals in a negative control group).
27. The X-bar chart is generally more informative when there are a reasonable number of studies
(e.g., 20 or more), while the I-chart is useful for a smaller number of studies. However, caution is needed
when using I-charts since the data may not be truly independent because, for instance, observations
from the same study may have correlated responses. If a group falls outside the limits of an X-bar chart,
it is probable that several individual values from the group will also fall outside the limits for the I-chart.
Ultimately, these control charts should be seen as complementary tools rather than one being superior
to the other.
28. Decision rules can be used with control charts to highlight when a process is out-of-control.
Codified rules are used to ensure that various control charts are interpreted in a consistent manner.
Western Electric rules and Nelson rules are two widely used examples that can highlight an out-of-control
process based on non-random characteristics of the data [Nelson, 1984]. For instance, Nelson rule
number 3 is “violated” when six (or more) data points in a row are continually increasing or decreasing.
29. Some statistical software programs supplement control charts with metrics developed for
monitoring manufacturing processes, which quantify the variability of a process. One example is the
Stability Index (SI) [Jensen et al., 2019] for non-grouped data that calculates by dividing the long-term
standard deviation (i.e., the total standard deviation of the database) by the short-term standard deviation
(i.e., the average of the moving range divided by d2). SI values close to 1.0 are considered stable with
low variability. Thus SI, together with Nelson or Western Electric rules (or subsets), provide warning
signals that aspect(s) of the assay have drifted to, or are in the process of drifting to, an out-of-control
status.
30. Variance Components Analysis (VCA) is another category of tests that can provide insights into
the quality of historical control data. There are a variety of related methods that include hierarchical or
nested ANOVA, Restricted Maximum Likelihood (REML) approaches, and Bayesian modelling methods
[Gelman and Hill, 2006]. Another strategy, called Evaluating the Measurement Process, has been

-- 36 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
36
described by Wheeler [2006]. These methods partition and estimate the proportion of total variation
accounted for by various experimental factors providing an estimate of standard deviation for the source.
4.5 Calculating intervals that describe historical negative control distributions
31. There are several valid approaches for characterizing the distribution of historical negative
control data, and each laboratory should use an appropriate method for describing their data. This
typically involves calculating upper and/or lower bounds to define the range where most negative control
animal values are expected to fall. Key considerations include sample size and whether the data are
normally distributed. A brief overview of methods for calculating an upper and/or lower bound limit is
provided below with further details available in the literature [Vardeman, 1992; InfinityQS International,
2014; and Kluxen et al., 2021].
4.5.1. Inappropriate methods
• Range: The range is typically based on all negative control animal values and is the difference between
the minimum and maximum observed value. Range does not adequately describe the historical
negative control distribution for the purpose of establishing useful lower and upper bound limits. This
is because the range will widen as the number of samples increases and may depend on one or two
extreme (unusual/outlier) values. A wide range may “reward” poorly performing laboratories by
masking potentially adverse study outcomes.
• Confidence interval: A confidence interval is a range of estimates likely to include a population value
(parameter), such as the mean with a defined degree of confidence (e.g., 95%). While formal
definitions involve considerations of repeat sampling from hypothetical populations, these are often
impractical to apply in real-world contexts. Importantly, confidence intervals are not useful for
adequately describing historical negative control distribution when establishing an upper bound limit
for criterion c. This is because confidence intervals become narrower as sample size increases,
reflecting the increased precision in estimating the population value (parameter), which makes them
inappropriate for OECD criterion c data interpretation.
4.5.2. Appropriate methods
32. Methods for calculating an interval that describe the distribution of historical negative control
data are listed below. A database of ≥ 100 individual rodents/data points from ≥ 20 independent
experiments is preferred. However, smaller intervals may suffice, particularly if the data are normally
distributed or can be normalized, and the assay is well-control. Intervals from smaller datasets should
be weighted less heavily than those from larger databases, as they are less likely to cover the desired
proportion.
33. Although historical control data may fall within these intervals, this does not mean that the data
are appropriate for criterion c-type assessments. Excessive variability can result in limit/interval values
that are too wide. This would be indicative of poor performance by the laboratory and should not be
mistaken for the “normal, biological variability” of the assay. This cautionary statement applies to all
intervals described below and underscores the recommendation to use methods such as Nelsen or
Western Electric rules, SI, and/or VCA to evaluate the quality of historical control data before calculating
distribution intervals.
• Control limit: In the field of Quality Control, multiples of the standard deviation, usually the mean ± 3
standard deviations, are used as control limits. These values are lines plotted on a control chart and
may be accompanied by other standard deviation multiples, for instance the mean ± 2 standard
deviations, which are referred to as warning limits. In conjunction with control charts, control and
warning limits are valuable tools for assessing the degree to which a repeated process or test is under

-- 37 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
37
control.
When setting up control charts, one should consider that the standard deviation used is not the same
as the standard deviation from summary sample statistics. Multiplying this standard deviation by 2 or
3 yields values different from those used to create the warning and control limits. This discrepancy
arises because statistical software often estimates the standard deviation using the “average moving
range,” as the true population standard deviation is unknown and needs to be estimated from the data.
The sample estimate of the standard deviation is adjusted accordingly to minimize biases or errors.
Assuming a normal distribution and an “under control” process, 99.73% of the negative control data
should fall within 3 standard deviations of the mean, and approximately 95% of the data should fall
within two standard deviations. Control and/or warning limits represent a useful resource for evaluating
historical negative control data and for providing upper and/or lower bound limits that aid in data
interpretation.
When considering study data in the context of criterion c-type assessments, warning limits that
describe where approximately 95% of normally distributed data fall (± 2 standard deviations) are
generally more appropriate than control limits that are based on 3 standard deviations. The former is
consistent with many OECD Test Guidelines (e.g., OECD TG474, 2016), while the latter characterizes
exceptionally rare/unusual data points, thereby generating intervals that are too wide for the criterion
c use case. However, control limits based on 3 standard deviations may be useful for data acceptability
criteria.
• Prediction intervals: Prediction intervals are designed to predict one, or several, future observation(s)
based on existing data. For example, with a 95% prediction interval, a new result (or specified number
of future observations) from a negative test article would be expected to fall in the prediction interval
with 95% probability. Non-normal data should be transformed as necessary prior to calculating the
interval, which can be back transformed to original units for use and reporting. Alternately, some
computer software programs enable a non-parametric calculation that does not assume a normal
distribution.
Prediction intervals typically address a specified number of future observations, usually one or several,
rather than a percentage of future observations. This may pose challenges for using a prediction
interval to judge study validity for criterion c-type purposes, unless one accompanies the calculation
with rationale for choosing a particular number of future observations.
• Tolerance intervals: Tolerance intervals, like prediction intervals, are forward-looking but are designed
to predict future observations with specified coverage and confidence levels. Coverage refers to the
percentage of future observations defined by the calculated lower and upper bounds (e.g., 95% or
99%), modeled with a specified confidence level. While tolerance intervals are often calculated using
95% confidence, this parameter can be user defined.
Considerations for normality and optional non-parametric approaches discussed for prediction
intervals also apply to tolerance intervals. In general, tolerance intervals are wider than prediction
intervals since they are designed to predict a high percentage of future values, while prediction
intervals typically focus on estimating one or a few new observations.
• Quantiles: Quantiles are used for summarizing the rank of data points based on size without assuming
any specific probability distribution. Quantiles are widely used in many biomedical applications where
non-normality because of outliers and/or skewness is common. For instance, intervals based on
percentiles are often used to help interpret test results. Confidence intervals for quantiles can be
calculated to provide estimates of uncertainty around the quantile measurement. These can help
evaluate the quality of the underlying data set. Quantile confidence intervals will be especially wide for
the tails of the distribution unless the sample size is large.

-- 38 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
38
4.6 Using historical control data to interpret study data
34. Low quality historical control data are not suitable for criterion c-type assessments. With this in
mind, this section describes the use of historical control data to interpret study data and is based on the
assumption that the database is large enough, and of an acceptable quality, for this purpose.
35. A common approach for fulfilling criterion c involves conducting a large number of studies, then
using the study mean values to calculate a historical control distribution-based interval (or else just the
upper bound limit value). In this case, the aforementioned “like to like” comparison translates to a straight-
forward assessment. That is, for any particular study, the treatment group mean values are compared to
the upper bound limit value (derived from historical negative control study means) that separates
“expected” from “elevated” values. This is a valid and useful approach, with the caveat that such a
strategy requires many separate studies and consequentially large numbers of rodents, and the use of
laboratory animals for this and other purposes is becoming more challenging in many regions of the
world.
36. As discussed previously, it is also possible to use individual animal data to evaluate the quality
of historical control data, and to calculate a useful interval (or else just an upper bound limit value) that
can be used for criterion c purposes (at least until enough studies have been performed to justify a study
mean-based interval). However, after arriving at an upper bound that separates expected from elevated
values, it may be less obvious how one should proceed to evaluate study results on a per animal basis.
In this situation, make use of well documented, sound scientific reasoning.
37. When sound scientific reasoning is used to assess individual animal data against an
appropriately derived upper bound limit value, at least four factors should be considered. First, how many
animals and numbers of studies were used to calculate the interval or upper bound limit? For example,
a database and upper limit based on 10 studies and 50 animals should carry more weight relative to 5
studies and 25 animals. Second, how many test chemical treated animal responses were above the
upper bound value? That is, the greater the number, the higher the concern. Third, which treatment
group(s) exhibited elevated values? For example, all the elevated value(s) appearing in the low dose
group may be indicative of a technical issue as opposed to a treatment-related effect. Fourth, what was
the magnitude of the elevated response(s)? That is, greatly elevated values would be of higher concern
than values that barely exceeded the upper bound limit.
38. This is not an exhaustive list of factors that should be considered. Rather, this subset focuses
on the interpretation of elevated individual animal responses against an upper bound limit, and how they
may contribute to the contextualization of statistical analyses (i.e., criteria a and b). Other important
considerations, such as the distribution and metabolism of a test substance, kinetics of appearance and
disappearance of the endpoint, etc., are additional important elements that must be considered when
assessing biological plausibility.
5. Interpretation of study results
39. The statistical approaches described in the preceding sections are regarded as representative
tools for evaluating whether the test chemical induces genotoxicity. That being said, sound scientific
judgement must take a leading role when considering any data set. This is especially obvious when
statistical analyses exhibit, what on the surface, may appear to be conflicting results. This paradigm was
reinforced by an expert OECD genotoxicity working group that met in Ottawa, Canada, 2013 [OECD,
2017].
40. In some cases, even after applying scientific judgement, appropriate statistical tools, and
possibly evaluating additional data, it will not be possible to classify a response as positive or negative.

-- 39 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
39
In these cases, the response is equivocal and further testing may be required to resolve the genotoxicity
of the test chemical.
6. Representative historical negative control table
41. As indicated in the Test Report section, study reports should provide information regarding the
manner in which historical negative control data were collected, evaluated, and utilised. The following
table is offered as a guideline.
Annex 4, Table 1. Representative historical negative control table*
Information Description and Comments
1. General description Date range Period over which the HCD were collected.
Test system The endpoint investigated and the model
used. For an in vivo study, this may include
the species, strain, sex, and age range of the
animals at the time of dose initiation and
tissue harvest, and the randomization or
blocking procedures employed.
Analytical system Method of data collection.
2. Basic metrics Number of studies and
observations
Number of studies the data were collected
from, and the total number of observations
used in the HCD, including a statement on
whether the observations are individual
animals or group means.
Median, mean** and Std.
Dev.
Median and mean of the HCD, with its
standard deviation. **Alternative measures
of central tendency may be used.
Observed range Minimum and maximum values observed
in the HCD.
Group structures Describe the rationale for combining or
separating historical control databases
based on experimental factors such as sex,
vehicles, dose routes, age groups, amount
of available data, and so forth.
3. Quality metrics Transformation A description of the analysis performed to
select the appropriate transformation and
justification for the final transformation
selected. Visualization of the transformed
HCD is recommended.
Control chart A longitudinal graphical display of the HCD,
that includes the type of control chart
presented and displays both warning and
control limits.
Variability over time An assessment of the stability of HCD over
time, including a brief description of the
methods used.
Sources of variation An assessment of the predominant source of
variability in the HCD, including a brief
description of the methods used.
Distribution interval Interval that describes the distribution of
the HCD, together with a brief description of

-- 40 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
40
the method used to calculate the interval and
a justification for why the specific interval
was selected.
*Given the amount and type of information requested above, one practical suggestion would be for
sponsors to supply these data in an appendix or annex to a regulatory study report. It would remain
consistent for some period of over time, until the historical negative control database has been updated
with new data/distributions.
7. References for Annex 4, in order of appearance
Dertinger SD, D Li, C Beevers, GR Douglas, RH Heflich, DP Lovell, DJ Roberts, R Smith, Y Uno, A
Williams, KL Witt, A Zeller, C Zhou (2023) Assessing the quality and making appropriate use of
historical negative control data: A report of the International Workshop on Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT).
Environ Mol Mutagen, in press, doi: 10.1002/em.22541.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). (2017) Overview of the set of OECD
Genetic Toxicology Test Guidelines and updates performed in 2014-2015. Series on Testing and
Assessment, No. 238 – 2nd edition. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/overview-of-the-
set-of-oecd-genetic-toxicology-test-guidelines-and-updates-performed-in-2014-2015-second-
edition_61eca5cd-en.html.
Bretz F, LA Hothorn (2003) Statistical analysis of monotone or non-monotone dose-response data from in
vitro toxicological assays. ATLA-Altern Lab Animal 31(Suppl 1):81-96.
Hayashi M, K Dearfield, P Kasper, D Lovell, H-J Martus, V Thybaud (2011) Compilation and use of genetic
toxicity historical control data. Mutat Res 723:87-90.
Igl B-W, A Bitsch, F Bringezu et al. (2019) The rat bone marrow micronucleus test: Statistical
considerations on historical negative control data. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 102:13-22.
Box GEP, DR Cox (1964) An Analysis of Transformations, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
B (Methodological), 26(2):211-243.
LS Nelson (1984) The Shewhart Control Chart—Tests for Special Causes. Journal of Quality Technology,
16(4):237-239.
WA Jensen, J Szarka III, J., K White (2019). Stability assessment with the stability index. Quality
Engineering, 31(2):289-301.
A Gelman, J Hill (2006) Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
DJ Wheeler (2006) EMP III (Evaluating the Measurement Process) Using Imperfect Data. SPC Press,
Knoxville, TN.
Vardeman SB (1992) What about the other intervals? The American Statistician 46:193-197.
InfinityQS International (2014) A practical guide to selecting the right control chart. pp 1-21. Available at:
http://www.infinityqs.com/sites/infinityqs.com/files/files/PDFs/InfinityQS_Practical_Guide_to_Selecting
_the_Right_Control_Chart_Oct2013.pdf.
Kluxen FM, K Weber, C Strupp, SM Jensen, LA Hothorn, J-C Garcin, T Hofmann (2021) Using historical
control data in bioassays for regulatory toxicology. Reg Toxicol Pharmacol 125:105024.

-- 41 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
41
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) (2016) OECD Guideline for the testing
of chemicals: Mammalian erythrocyte micronucleus test. Test Guideline 474. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2016/07/test-no-474-mammalian-erythrocyte-micronucleus-
test_g1g6fb16.html.

-- 42 of 43 --

OECD/OCDE 470
© OECD (2025)
42
Annex 5 - An alternative to mutant mimics for
establishing flow cytometer settings for conducting
the Pig-a assay
An alternative to mutant mimics is to use blood samples previously collected from animals with elevated
Pig-a mutant frequencies (such as from positive controls, if used). Such samples can be stored and used
as flow cytometry standards to identify the light scatter and fluorescence characteristics of mutant versus
wild-type RET and RBC. In these cases, it is usually sufficient to include 1 to 3 such blood samples at
each time point studied. Examples of test chemicals that will produce appropriate increased mutant
frequencies are listed in Table 1. Note that it is not necessary to administer the substance using the
same route of administration as the test chemical, and the dosing and blood sampling schedule can be
different, as long as samples with elevated MUT RBC and MUT RET frequencies are available at the
time when experimental analyses are conducted. When blood sample(s) with elevated mutant
frequencies come from previously treated rodents, blood should be stored appropriately (paragraphs 58-
59). When these samples are being used in place of mutant mimics, the blood sample(s) should
demonstrate levels of MUT RET and MUT RBC that are elevated sufficiently to establish the fluorescence
characteristics of mutant phenotype cells. For this purpose, it is ideal for the mutant frequency in these
two cell populations be at least 100 mutant cells per million erythrocytes.

-- 43 of 43 --

