[SOURCE URL] https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2019/06/test-no-432-in-vitro-3t3-nru-phototoxicity-test_g1gh4b69/9789264071162-en.pdf
[CHARS] 44680

Test Guideline No. 432
In Vitro 	3T3 NRU Phototoxicity Test
18 June 2019
OECD Guidelines for the
Testing of Chemicals
Section 4
Health effects

-- 1 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432
Adopted:
18 June 2019
© OECD, (2019)
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/.
OECD GUIDELINE FOR TESTING OF CHEMICALS
In Vitro 3T3 NRU Phototoxicity Test
INTRODUCTION
Phototoxicity is defined as a toxic response elicited by topically or systemically
administered photoreactive chemicals after the exposure of the body to environmental light.
The in vitro 3T3 Neutral Red Uptake (NRU) phototoxicity test is used to identify the
phototoxic potential of a test chemical activated by exposure to light. The test evaluates
photo-cytotoxicity by the relative reduction in viability of cells exposed to the test chemical
in the presence versus absence of light. Chemicals identified as positive in this test may be
phototoxic in vivo, following topical application or systemic application and distribution to
the skin and/or eyes.
Definitions used in this Test Guideline are provided in Annex A.
INITIAL CONSIDERATION
Many types of chemicals have been reported to induce phototoxic effects (1)(2)(3)(4).
Their common feature is their ability to absorb light energy within the sunlight range.
Photoreactions require sufficient absorption of light quanta. Thus, before testing is
considered, a UV/vis absorption spectrum of the test chemical may be determined according
to OECD Test Guideline 101. It has been reported that if the molar extinction/absorption
coefficient (MEC) is less than 1000 L mol-1 cm-1 (measured in methanol), the chemical is
unlikely to be photoreactive (5)(6). Such chemicals may not need to be tested in the in vitro
3T3 NRU phototoxicity test or any other biological test for adverse photochemical effects
(1)(7). In general, this principle applies to all test chemicals, however, depending on the
intended use of the chemical or potential exposure conditions, more specific guidelines may
apply (such as ICH S10 for pharmaceuticals) (5). See also Annex B.

-- 2 of 20 --

2 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
The reliability and relevance of the in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test was evaluated
(8)(9)(10)(11). The in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test was shown to be predictive of acute
phototoxicity effects in animals and humans in vivo. The test is not designed to predict other
adverse effects that may arise from combined action of a chemical and light, e.g., it does not
address photogenotoxicity, photoallergy, or photocarcinogenicity, per se. Furthermore, the
test has not been designed to address indirect mechanisms of phototoxicity, effects of
metabolites of the test chemical, or effects of mixtures. However, in some cases, a negative
in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test may obviate the need for other testing, e.g.
photogenotoxicity (see Note 2 (6) (12)(13) ).
The in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test does not need to be performed with a
metabolic activation system, because at this time, there is no evidence that any phototoxicants
would be missed in the absence of metabolic activation toxicants (13).
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST METHOD
The in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test is based on a comparison of the cytotoxicity
of a chemical when tested in the presence and in the absence of exposure to a non-cytotoxic
dose of simulated solar light. Cytotoxicity in this test is expressed as a concentration-
dependent reduction of the uptake of the vital dye Neutral Red (NR) when measured 18-24
hours after treatment with the test chemical and irradiation (14). NR is a weak cationic dye
that readily penetrates cell membranes by non-ionic diffusion and accumulates intracellularly
in lysosomes. NR is not charged at close-to-neutral pH of the cytoplasm but becomes
positively charged and trapped in low pH of lysosomal lumen. The low pH of lysosomal
lumen is actively maintained, requires ATP, and is dependent on integrity of the lysosomal
membrane. Phototoxins can induce cell damage through formation of Reactive Oxygen
Species (ROS) and other mechanisms that lead to increased permeability of the lysosomal
membrane, reduction in the pH gradient, and other changes that gradually become
irreversible (15)(16). Such changes brought about by the action of xenobiotics result in a
decreased uptake and binding of NR. It is thus possible to distinguish between viable and
damaged or dead cells.
BALB/c 3T3 cells are maintained in culture for 18-24 h for formation of monolayers.
Two 96-well plates per test chemical are pre-incubated with eight different concentrations of
the test chemical for 1 h. Thereafter one of the two plates is exposed to an irradiation dose
whereas the other plate is kept in the dark. In both plates, the treatment buffer is then replaced
with fresh culture medium and cell viability is determined by NRU after an 18-24 h
incubation. Cell viability is expressed as percentage of test chemical-treated NRU values
compared with solvent controls, and is calculated for each test concentration. To predict the
phototoxic potential, the concentration-responses obtained in the presence and in the absence
of irradiation are compared, including the concentration reducing cell viability to 50 %
compared to the solvent controls (i.e., IC50).

-- 3 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 3
©OECD 2019
DESCRIPTION OF THE TEST METHOD
Preparations
Cells
An immortalised mouse fibroblast cell line, BALB/c 3T3, clone A31, obtained from
either the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA, USA, or from the
European Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC), Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK, was used in the
validation study. It is recommended that cells be obtained from a recognised cell depository
(23). Other cells or cell lines may be used with the same test procedure if culture conditions
are adapted to the specific needs of the cells, but equivalency must be demonstrated (i.e.,
appropriate responses to reference chemicals), in accordance with the principles of Guidance
Document No. 34 (22).
Cells should be checked for mycoplasma contamination upon arrival in the laboratory
(see (17) for recommendations) and only used if none is found (18).
It is important that UV sensitivity of the cells is checked regularly according to the
quality control procedure described in this guideline. Because the UVA sensitivity of cells
may increase with the number of passages, BALB/c 3T3 cells with a total passage number
preferably less than 100 should be used in the assay (see paragraph 29 and Annex C). If cells
of a higher passage numbers are used data must be available to demonstrate that cells adhere
to the quality parameters in this guideline.
Media and culture conditions
Appropriate culture media and incubation conditions should be used for routine cell
passage and during the test procedure, e.g., for BALB/c 3T3 cells these are DMEM
(Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium) supplemented with 10% new-born calf serum, 4 mM
glutamine, penicillin (100 IU), and streptomycin (100 g/mL), and humidified incubation at
370 C, targeting 5-7.5% CO2 depending on the buffer (see paragraph 17). Depending on
buffer used, the CO2 levels may be adjusted. It is important that cell culture conditions assure
a cell division cycle time within the normal historical range of the cells or cell line used.
Preparation of cultures
Cells from frozen stock cultures are seeded in culture medium at an appropriate
density and subcultured at least once before they are used in the in vitro 3T3 NRU
phototoxicity test.
Cells used for the phototoxicity test are seeded in culture medium at the appropriate
density so that cultures will not reach confluence by the end of the test, i.e., when cell viability
is determined 48 h after seeding of the cells. For BALB/c 3T3 cells grown in 96-well plates,
the recommended cell seeding density is 1 x 104 cells per well.
For each test chemical cells are seeded identically in two separate 96-well plates.
Both plates are then taken concurrently through the entire test procedure under identical
culture conditions except for the time period where one of the plates is irradiated (+Irr) and
the other one is kept in the dark (-Irr).

-- 4 of 20 --

4 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
Preparation of test chemical
Test chemicals must be prepared fresh on the day of testing unless data demonstrate
their stability in storage. It is recommended that all chemical handling and the initial
treatment of cells be performed under conditions that would avoid photoactivation or
degradation of the test chemical prior to irradiation.
Ideally, test chemicals shall be dissolved in buffered salt solutions, e.g. Earle´s or
Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution (EBSS or HBSS), or other physiologically balanced buffer
solutions, which must be free from protein components and light absorbing components (e.g.,
pH indicators such as phenol red and vitamins) to avoid interference during irradiation. Since
during irradiation, cells are kept for about 50 minutes outside of the CO2 incubator, care has
to be taken to avoid alkalisation. If the cells are incubated at 5% CO2 only, a stronger buffer
should be selected.
Test chemicals of limited solubility in water should be dissolved in an appropriate
solvent. If a solvent is used it must be present at a constant volume in all cultures (i.e., in the
solvent controls, as well as in all concentrations of the test chemical) and be non-cytotoxic at
that concentration.
If the materials are not aqueous soluble, then dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) or ethanol
(EtOH) are the recommended solvents. Other solvents of low cytotoxicity may be appropriate
if the material is poorly soluble in water, DMSO or ethanol. Prior to use, all solvents should
be assessed for specific properties (e.g., reaction with the test chemical, induce phototoxicity,
quenching of the phototoxic effect, radical scavenging properties and/or chemical stability in
the solvent). For test chemicals dissolved in the organic solvents DMSO or ethanol, a dilution
series of eight dilutions will be prepared in the same solvent, and the eight stock solutions
prepared in organic solvent will be transferred into the aqueous vehicle (e.g., EBSS or HBSS)
for application to the cells. The stock solution for each test chemical should be prepared at
the highest soluble concentration in DMSO or ethanol to achieve a maximum concentration
of 1000 μg/mL in the aqueous vehicle. The final solvent concentration in the aqueous vehicle
should be kept constant in all of the eight test concentrations (generally 1% (v/v)). Test
chemicals prepared in the organic solvent may precipitate upon transfer into the aqueous
vehicle. Accordingly, the aqueous dosing dilutions should be evaluated for solubility and the
observations recorded.
Vortex mixing, sonication, and/or warming to appropriate temperatures may be used
to aid solubilisation unless this compromises the stability of the test chemical.
Irradiation Conditions
Light source: The choice of an appropriate light source (e.g. a solar simulator) and
filters is a crucial factor in phototoxicity testing. Light of the UVA and visible regions is
usually associated with phototoxic reactions in vivo (3)(19), whereas generally UVB is of
less relevance but is highly cytotoxic; the cytotoxicity increases 1000-fold as the wavelength
goes from 313 to 280 nm (20). Acceptable light sources emit the entire solar spectrum (290
nm through 700 nm). Adjustment of the spectrum can be performed using filters to attenuate
UVB while allowing transmittance of UVA and visible light (see
Annex C). Furthermore, the wavelengths, doses employed, and light source equipment used
(e.g., open or closed system) should not be unduly deleterious to the test system (e.g., from
emission of heat/ wavelengths in the infrared region).
Simulation of sunlight with solar simulators is considered the optimal artificial light
source. The irradiation power distribution of the filtered solar simulator should be close to

-- 5 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 5
©OECD 2019
that of outdoor daylight given in (21). Both xenon arcs and (doped) mercury-metal halide
arcs are used as solar simulators (22). The latter have the advantage of emitting less heat and
being cheaper, but the match to sunlight is not as good as that provided by xenon arcs. All
solar simulators emit significant quantities of UVB and should be suitably filtered to
attenuate the highly cytotoxic UVB wavelengths (Annex A). Because cell culture plastic
materials contain UV stabilisers, the transmitted spectrum should be measured through the
same type of 96-well plate lid as will be used in the assay. Irrespective of measures taken to
attenuate parts of the spectrum by filtering or by unavoidable filter effects of the equipment,
the spectrum recorded below these filters should not deviate from standardised outdoor
daylight (21). External light standard D65, the internationally recognized emission standard
for outdoor daylight, is provided in ISO DIS 18909:2006. An example of the spectral
irradiance distribution of the filtered solar simulator used in the validation study of the in
vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test is given in (10)(23). See also Annex C Figure 1.
Dosimetry: The intensity of light (irradiance) should be regularly checked before
each phototoxicity test using a suitable broadband UVA-meter (Annex A). Irradiance should
be measured through the same type of 96-well plate lid as will be used in the assay. The
UVA-meter must have been calibrated to the light source. At greater intervals, an externally
calibrated reference UV-vis spectroradiometer should be used to measure spectral irradiance
of the filtered light source on-site and to adjust the calibration of the broadband UVA-meter
if needed. Alternatively, regular calibration of the UVA-meter could be performed at a
central calibration laboratory provided that this facility is equipped with an identical light
source/filter combination.
A dose of 5 J/cm2 (as measured in the UVA range) was determined to be non-
cytotoxic to BALB/c 3T3 cells and sufficiently potent to excite chemicals to elicit phototoxic
reactions (6)(24). To achieve 5 J/cm2 within a time period of 50 min, irradiance was adjusted
to 1.7 mW/cm2. See Annex C, Figure 2. Alternate exposure times and/or irradiance values
may be used to achieve 5 J/cm2 using the formula:
Wsec)	1	J	(1
60	)	(mW/cm	irradiance
1000	)	(J/cm	dose	n	irradiatio
(min)	t 2
2




Similarly, if another cell line or a different light source is used, the irradiation should
be calibrated so that a dose regimen can be selected that is not deleterious to the cells but
sufficient to excite standard phototoxins (e.g., proficiency chemicals described in Table 1)
(28).
Test conditions
Test chemical concentrations
The ranges of concentrations of a chemical tested in the presence (+Irr) and in the
absence
(-Irr) of light should be adequately determined in dose range-finding experiments. It may be
useful to assess solubility initially and at 60 min (or whatever treatment time is to be used),
as solubility can change during the course of exposure. To avoid toxicity induced by
improper culture conditions or by highly acidic or alkaline chemicals, the pH of the cell
cultures with added test chemical should be in the range 6.5 to 7.8.

-- 6 of 20 --

6 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
The highest concentration of the test chemical should be within physiological test
conditions (e.g., osmotic and pH stress should be avoided). Depending on the test chemical,
it may be necessary to consider other physio-chemical properties as factors limiting the
highest test concentration. For relatively insoluble chemicals that are not toxic at
concentrations up to the saturation point, the highest achievable concentration should be
tested. For non-cytotoxic chemicals (no IC50 value up to precipitation), it might be useful to
demonstrate the solubility limit under assay conditions. In this case, including two or three
concentrations in the main experiment that will likely show precipitation may be useful.
These concentration(s) should then be excluded from phototoxicity analyses. The maximum
concentration of a test chemical should not exceed 1000 μg/mL. In many cases, the
maximum concentration can be reduced to 100 μg/mL, since compounds without any
significant cytotoxicity (under irradiation) up to this limit can be considered as being devoid
of relevant phototoxicity (5). A higher maximum concentration, without irradiation, might
still be considered to establish IC50 values for Photo Irritation Factor (PIF) calculation. A
geometric dilution series of 8 test chemical concentrations with a constant dilution factor
should be used (see paragraph 47).
If there is information (from a range finding experiment) that the test chemical is not
cytotoxic up to the limit concentration in the dark experiment (-Irr), but is highly cytotoxic
when irradiated (+Irr), the concentration ranges to be selected for the (+Irr) experiment may
differ from those selected for the (–Irr) experiment to fulfil the requirement of adequate data
quality.
Controls
Radiation sensitivity of the cells, establishing of historical data: A working bank of
cells may be checked at least once for sensitivity to the light source by assessing their viability
following exposure to increasing doses of irradiation. UV sensitivity should be demonstrated
on the highest cell passage number in use. Several doses of irradiation, including levels
greater than those used for the in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test should be used in this
assessment. These doses are quantitated easier by measurements of UV parts of the light
source. Cells are seeded at the same density used in the in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test
and irradiated the next day (see Test procedure section). Cell viability is then determined
on the third day using Neutral Red uptake. It should be demonstrated that the resulting highest
non-cytotoxic dose (e.g., in the validation study: 5 J/cm2 [UVA]) was sufficient to classify
the proficiency chemicals (Table 1) correctly.
Radiation sensitivity, check of current test: The test meets the quality criteria if the
irradiated solvent controls show a viability of more than 80% when compared with non-
irradiated solvent control.
Viability of solvent controls: The absolute optical density (OD540±10 NRU) of the
Neutral Red extracted from the solvent controls indicates whether the 1x104 cells seeded per
well have grown with a normal doubling time during the two days of the assay. A test meets
the acceptance criteria if the mean OD540±10 NRU of the solvent controls is  0.4 (i.e.,
approximately twenty times the background solvent absorbance).
Attention should be paid to crystallisation of the Neutral Red (NR) solution during
the incubation with the cells, since crystals may lead to high variability. A shift in the pH of
the neutral red solution may trigger formation of NR crystals. Addition of pH stabilisers (e.g.,
HEPES) to the cell culture medium may prevent crystallization (29). It is recommended to
pre-qualify the stock Neutral Red before use in the experiments since the quality from various

-- 7 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 7
©OECD 2019
suppliers may differ. Filtration or centrifugation of the solution of Neutral Red in the cell
culture media is highly recommended.
Positive control: A known phototoxic chemical shall be tested concurrently with each
in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test. Chlorpromazine (CPZ) is recommended. For CPZ
tested with the standard protocol in the in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test, the following
test acceptance criteria were defined: CPZ irradiated (+Irr): IC50 = 0.1 to 2.0 g/mL; CPZ
non-irradiated (-Irr): IC50 = 7.0 to 90.0 g/mL. The Photo Irritation Factor (PIF), should be
> 6. The historical performance of the positive control should be monitored. Each laboratory
performing this assay should establish its own historical databases including Mean Photo
Effect (MPE) to monitor the performance over time (Table 1).
Other phototoxic chemicals, suitable for the chemical class or solubility
characteristics of the chemical being evaluated, may be used as the concurrent positive
controls in place of chlorpromazine (Table 1).
Test procedure (8)(9)(10)(22)(23)(24):
1st day:
Dispense 100 L culture medium into the peripheral wells of a 96-well tissue culture
microtiter plate (= blanks). In the remaining wells, dispense 100 L of a cell suspension of
1xl05 cells/mL in culture medium (= 1x104 cells/well). Two plates should be prepared for
each series of individual test chemical concentrations, including the solvent controls.
Similarly, two plates should be prepared for the positive controls, including solvent controls.
Incubate cells for 18-24 h (see paragraph 12) until they form an approximately half
confluent monolayer. This incubation period allows for cell recovery, adherence, and
exponential growth.
2nd day:
After incubation, decant culture medium from the cells and wash gently with 150 L
of the buffer solution used for incubation (see paragraph 17). Add 100 L of the buffer
containing the appropriate concentration of test chemical or solvent (solvent control). Apply
8 different concentrations of the test chemical to both plates. Incubate cells with the test
chemical in the dark for 60 minutes.
From the two plates prepared for each series of 8 test chemical concentrations and
the controls, one plate is selected for the determination of cytotoxicity (-Irr) (i.e., the control
plate), and one (the treatment plate) for the determination of photocytotoxicity (+Irr).
To perform the +Irr exposure, irradiate the cells at room temperature for
approximately 50 minutes through the lid of the 96-well plate with the highest dose of
radiation that is non-cytotoxic (i.e., 5 J/cm2; see also Annex C). Keep non-irradiated plates (-
Irr) at room temperature in dark conditions for approximately 50 min (= light exposure time).
Decant test solution and carefully wash twice with 150 L of the buffer solution used
for incubation, but not containing the test material. Replace the buffer with culture medium
and incubate overnight (18-24 h; see paragraph 12).

-- 8 of 20 --

8 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
3rd day:
Microscopic evaluation
Cells should be examined for growth, morphology, and integrity of the monolayer
using a phase contrast microscope. Changes in cell morphology and effects on cell growth
should be recorded.
Neutral Red Uptake test
Wash the cells with 150 L of the pre-warmed (37oC) buffer solution. Remove the
buffer solution. Add 100 L of a 50 μg/mL Neutral Red (NR) (3-amino-7-dimethylamino-
2-methylphenazine hydrochloride, CAS number 553-24-2; C.I. 50040) in medium without
serum (23) and incubate (as described in paragraph 12) for 3 h.
After incubation, remove the NR medium, and wash cells with 150 L of the buffer.
Decant and remove excess buffer by blotting or centrifugation.
Add exactly 150 L NR desorb solution (freshly prepared 49 parts water + 50 parts
ethanol + 1 part acetic acid).
Shake the microtiter plate gently on a microtiter plate shaker for at least 10 min until
NR has been extracted from the cells and has formed a homogeneous solution.
Measure the optical density of the NR extract at 540±10 nm in a spectrophotometer,
using blanks as a reference. Save data in an appropriate electronic file format for subsequent
analysis.
DATA AND REPORTING:
Quality and quantity of data
Appropriate concentrations which capture the concentration-responses in the
presence and absence of irradiation should be selected to allow meaningful analysis of the
data, and if possible a determination of the concentration of test chemical by which cell
viability is reduced to 50% (IC50). If cytotoxicity is observed, the ranges of concentrations
tested may be updated to capture the range of concentration-responses (e.g., those
concentrations which result in viabilities above and below 50%).
For both clearly positive and clearly negative results (see paragraph 53), the primary
experiment, supported by one or more preliminary concentration range-finding
experiment(s), may be sufficient.
Equivocal, borderline, or unclear results should be clarified by further testing (see
also paragraph 56). In such cases, modification of experimental conditions should be
considered. Experimental conditions that might be modified include the concentration range
or spacing, the incubation time, and the irradiation-exposure time. A shorter exposure time
may be appropriate for water-unstable chemicals.
Evaluation of results
To enable evaluation of the data, a Photo-Irritation-Factor (PIF) or Mean Photo Effect
(MPE) should be calculated.

-- 9 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 9
©OECD 2019
For the calculation of the measures of photocytotoxicity (see below) the set of
discrete concentration-response values has to be approximated by an appropriate continuous
concentration-response curve (model). Fitting of the curve to the data is commonly
performed by a non-linear regression method (25). To assess the influence of data variability
on the fitted curve a bootstrap procedure is recommended.
A Photo-Irritation-Factor (PIF) is calculated using the following formula:
If an IC50 in the presence or absence of light cannot be calculated, a PIF cannot be determined for the
test material.
The Mean Photo Effect (MPE) is based on comparison of the complete concentration
response curves (26). It is defined as the weighted average across a representative set of photo
effect values
The photo effect (PEc) at any concentration (C) is defined as the product of the response effect (REc)
and the dose effect (DEc) i.e., PEc = REc x DEc. The response effect (REc) is the difference between
the responses observed in the absence and presence of light, i.e,. REc = Rc (-Irr) – Rc (+Irr). The dose-
effect is given by
DEc =
where C* represents the equivalence concentration, i.e., the concentration at which the +Irr response
equals the –Irr response at concentration C. If C* cannot be determined because the response values
of the +Irr curve are systematically higher or lower than RC(-Irr) the dose effect is set to 1. The
weighting factors wi are given by the highest response value, i.e., wi = MAX {Ri (+Irr), Ri (-Irr)}.
The concentration grid Ci is chosen such that the same number of points falls into each of the
concentration intervals defined by the concentration values used in the experiment. The calculation
of MPE is restricted to the maximum concentration value at which at least one of the two curves still
exhibits a response value of at least 10%. If this maximum concentration is higher than the highest
concentration used in the +Irr experiment the residual part of the +Irr curve is set to the response
value “0”. The chemical is classified as phototoxic depending on whether the MPE value is larger
than a properly chosen cut-off value (MPEc> 0.15).
A software package for the calculation of the PIF and MPE is available from the
OECD Secretariat (27).
Irr)	(	IC
(-Irr)	IC
PIF 50
50


1	*	C/C
-1	*	C/C

w
PE	w
MPE n
1	i
i
c
n
1	i
i i






-- 10 of 20 --

10 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
Interpretation of Results
Based on the validation study (10), a test chemical with a PIF < 2 or an MPE < 0.1
predicts: “no phototoxicity”. A PIF >2 and < 5 or an MPE > 0.1 and < 0.15 predicts:
“equivocal” phototoxicity and a PIF > 5 or an MPE > 0.15 predicts: “phototoxicity”. Further
guidance specific to pharmaceutical chemicals other guidelines may be helpful (6).
Prediction PIF MPE
No phototoxicity PIF < 2 or MPE < 0.1
Equivocal phototoxicity* PIF > 2 and <5 or MPE > 0.1 and < 0.15
Phototoxicity PIF > 5 or MPE > 0.15
Note: * In the pharmaceutical sector, chemicals in this category are of questionable relevance for systemic drugs and
generally do not warrant further photosafety evaluation (6).
For any laboratory initially establishing this assay, the proficiency chemicals listed
in Table 1 should be tested to establish proficiency prior to the routine testing of test
chemicals for phototoxicity. PIF or MPE values should be close to the values mentioned in
Table 1 (9)(10)(11).

-- 11 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 11
©OECD 2019
Table 1. Proficiency chemicals
Chemical CAS No. PIF MPE Phototoxic Absorption Peak
Amiodarone
HCL
19774-
82-4
>3.25 0.27-
0.54
Yes 242 nm
300 nm (shoulder) in
ethanol
Chloropromazine
HCL
69-09-0 >14.4 0.33-
0.63
Yes 309 nm in ethanol
Norfloxacin 70458-
96-7
>71.6 0.34-
0.90
Yes 316 nm in
acetonitrile
Anthracene 120-12-7 >18.5 0.19-
0.81
Yes 356 nm in
acetonitrile
Protoporphyrin IX,
Disodium
50865-
01-5
>45.3 0.54-
0.74
Yes 402 nm in ethanol
L – Histidine 7006-35-
1
no
PIF
0.05-
0.10
No 211 nm in water
Hexachlorophene 70-30-4 1.1-
1.7
0.00-
0.05
No 299 nm
317 nm (shoulder) in
ethanol
Sodium lauryl
sulfate
151-21-3 1.0-
1.9
0.00-
0.05
No no absorption in
water
Source: Values from Spielmann et al. 1998 (9).
Interpretation of data
If phototoxic effects are observed only at the highest test concentration, (especially
for water soluble test chemicals) additional considerations may be necessary for assessment
of hazard. These may include data on skin absorption, and accumulation of the chemical in
the skin and / or data from other tests, e.g., testing of the chemical in the ROS assay, in vitro
animal or human skin assays, or skin models.
Test Report
The test report should include the following information:
Test chemical:
- identification data, common generic names and IUPAC and CAS number, if known;
- physical nature and purity;
- physicochemical properties relevant to conduct of the study;
- UV/vis absorption spectrum;
- stability and photostability, if known.
Solvent:
- justification for choice of solvent;
- solubility of the test chemical in solvent;
- percentage of solvent present in treatment medium.

-- 12 of 20 --

12 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
Cells:
- type and source of cells;
- absence of mycoplasma and other contamination;
- cell passage number,
- Radiation sensitivity of cells from a particular passage range, determined with the irradiation
equipment used in the in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test.
Test conditions (1); incubation before and after treatment:
- type and composition of culture medium;
- incubation conditions (CO2 concentration; temperature; humidity);
- duration of incubation (pre-treatment; post-treatment).
Test conditions (2); treatment with the chemical:
- rationale for selection of concentrations of the test chemical used in the presence and in the
absence of irradiation;
- in case of limited solubility of the test chemical and absence of cytotoxicity: rationale for the
highest concentration tested;
- type and composition of treatment medium (buffered salt solution);
- duration of the chemical treatment.
Test conditions (3); irradiation:
- rationale for selection of the light source used;
- manufacturer and type of light source and radiometer
- spectral irradiance characteristics of the light source;
- transmission and absorption characteristics of the filter(s) used;
- characteristics of the radiometer and details on its calibration;
- distance of the light source from the test system;
- UVA irradiance at this distance, expressed in mW/cm2;
- duration of the UV/vis light exposure;
- UVA dose (irradiance x time), expressed in J/cm2;
- temperature of cell cultures during irradiation and cell cultures concurrently kept in the dark.
Test conditions (4); Neutral Red viability test:
- composition of Neutral Red treatment medium;
- duration of Neutral Red incubation;
- incubation conditions (CO2 concentration; temperature; humidity);
- Neutral Red extraction conditions (extractant; duration);
- wavelength used for spectrophotometric reading of Neutral Red optical density;
- second wavelength (reference), if used;
- content of spectrophotometer blank, if used.
Results:
- cell viability obtained at each concentration of the test chemical, expressed in percent
viability of mean, concurrent solvent controls;
- concentration response curves (test chemical concentration vs. relative cell viability) obtained
in concurrent +Irr and -Irr experiments;
- analysis of the concentration-response curves: if possible, computation/calculation of IC50
(+Irr) and IC50 (-Irr);

-- 13 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 13
©OECD 2019
- comparison of the two concentration response curves obtained in the presence and in the
absence of irradiation, either by calculation of the Photo-Inhibition-Factor (PIF), and/or by
calculation of the Mean-Photo-Effect (MPE) depending on the dose-response curve;
- test acceptance criteria; concurrent solvent control:
- absolute viability (optical density of Neutral Red extract) of irradiated and non-irradiated
cells;
- historic negative and solvent control data; means and standard deviations.
- test acceptance criteria; concurrent positive control:
- IC50(+Irr) and IC50(-Irr) and PIF/MPE of positive control chemical;
- historic positive control chemical data: IC50(+Irr) and IC50(-Irr) and PIF/MPE; means and
standard deviations.
Discussion of the results.
Conclusions.
LITERATURE
(1) Lovell W.W. (1993). A scheme for in vitro screening of substances for photoallergenic potential.
Toxic. In Vitro 7: 95-102.
(2) Santamaria, L. and Prino, G. (1972). List of the photodynamic substances. In “Research Progress in
Organic, Biological and Medicinal Chemistry” Vol. 3 part 1. North Holland Publishing Co.
Amsterdam. p XI-XXXV.
(3) Spielmann, H., Lovell, W.W., Hölzle, E., Johnson, B.E., Maurer, T., Miranda, M.A., Pape, W.J.W.,
Sapora, O., and Sladowski, D. (1994). In vitro phototoxicity testing: The report and recommendations
of ECVAM Workshop 2. ATLA, 22, 314-348.
(4) Spikes, J.D. (1989). Photosensitization. In “The science of Photobiology” Edited by K.C. Smith.
Plenum Press, New York. 2nd edition, p 79-110.
(5) Bauer D, Averett LA, De Smedt A, Kleinman MH, Muster W, Pettersen BA, Robles C. (2014).
Standardized UV-vis spectra as the foundation for a threshold-based, integrated photosafety
evaluation. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol, 68: 70-75.
(6) ICH S10 Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals. Guidance for Industry. January 2015.
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm06500
7.htm
(7) OECD (1997) Environmental Health and Safety Publications, Series on Testing and Assessment No.
7 ”Guidance Document On Direct Phototransformation Of Chemicals In Water” Environment
Directorate, OECD, Paris
(8) Spielmann, H., Balls, M., Döring, B., Holzhütter, H.G., Kalweit, S., Klecak, G., L’Eplattenier, H.,
Liebsch, M., Lovell, W.W., Maurer, T., Moldenhauer. F. Moore. L., Pape, W., Pfannbecker, U.,

-- 14 of 20 --

14 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
Potthast, J., De Silva, O., Steiling, W., and Willshaw, A. (1994). EEC/COLIPA project on in vitro
phototoxicity testing: First results obtained with a BALB/c 3T3 cell phototoxicity assay. Toxic. In
Vitro 8, 793-796.
(9) Anon (1998). Statement on the scientific validity of the 3T3 NRU PT test (an in vitro test for
phototoxicity), European Commission, Joint Research Centre: ECVAM and DGXI/E/2, 3 November
1997, ATLA, 26, 7-8.
(10) Spielmann, H., Balls, M., Dupuis, J., Pape, W.J.W., Pechovitch, G. De Silva, O., Holzhütter, H.G.,
Clothier, R., Desolle, P., Gerberick, F., Liebsch, M., Lovell, W.W., Maurer, T., Pfannenbecker, U.,
Potthast, J. M., Csato, M., Sladowski, D., Steiling, W., and Brantom, P. (1998). The international
EU/COLIPA In vitro phototoxicity validation study: results of phase II (blind trial), part 1: the 3T3
NRU phototoxicity test. Toxic. In Vitro 12, 305-327.
(11) OECD (2002) Extended Expert Consultation Meeting on The In Vitro 3T3 NRU Phototoxicity Test
Guideline Proposal, Berlin, 30th – 31st October 2001, Secretariat's Final Summary Report, 15th March
2002, OECD ENV/EHS, available upon request from the Secretariat
(12) Lynch AM, Guzzie PJ, Bauer D, Gocke E, Itoh S, Jacobs A, Frul CA, Schepky A, Tanaka N, Kasper
P. (2011) Consideration on photochemical genotoxicity. II: report of the 2009 International Workshop
on Genotoxicity Testing Working Group. Mutat Res 723: 91-100.
(13) Ceridono M, Tellner Par, Bauer D, Barroso J, Alépée N, Corvi R, De Smedt A, Fellows MD, Gibbs
NK, Heisler E, Jacobs A, Jirova D, Jones D, Kanádarová H, Kasper P, Akunda JK, Krul C, Learn D,
Liebsch M, Lynch AM, Muster W, Nakamura K, Nash JF, Pfannenbecker U, Phillips G, Robles C,
Rogiers V, Van De Water F, Liminga UW, Vohr HW, Wattrelos O, Woods J, Zuang V, Kreysa J,
Wilcox P. (2012) The 3T3 neutral red uptate photoxiticity test: practical experience and implications
for phototoxicity Testing – The report of an ECVAM-EFPIA workshop. Reg Tox Pharm. 63: 480-
488.
(14) Borenfreund, E., and Puerner, J.A. (1985). Toxicity determination in vitro by morphological
alterations and neutral red absorption. Toxicology Lett., 24, 119-124.
(15) Brunk UT, Svensson I (1999) Oxidative stress, growth factor starvation and Fas activation may all
cause apoptosis through lysosomal leak. Redox Report; 4(1-2): 3-11.
(16) Johansson A-C, Appelqvist H, Nilsson C, Kågedal K, Roberg K, Öllinger K. (2010) Regulation of
apoptosis-associated lysosomal membrane permeabilization. Apoptosis.;15(5):527-540.
doi:10.1007/s10495-009-0452-5)
(17) OECD (2018). Guidance Document on Good In Vitro Methods Practices (GIVIMP). OECD Series
on Testing and Assessment No. 286. https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/guidance-document-
on-good-in-vitro-method-practices-givimp_9789264304796-en
(18) Hay, R.J. (1988) The seed stock concept and quality control for cell lines. Analytical Biochemistry
171, 225-237.

-- 15 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 15
©OECD 2019
(19) Lambert L.A, Wamer W.G., and Kornhauser A. (1996) Animal models for phototoxicity testing. In
“Dermatotoxicology”, edited by F.N. Marzulli and H.I. Maibach. Taylor & Francis, Washington DC.
5th Edition, p 515-530.
(20) Tyrrell R.M., Pidoux M (1987) Action spectra for human skin cells: estimates of the relative
cytotoxicity of the middle ultraviolet, near ultraviolet and violet regions of sunlight on epidermal
keratinocytes. Cancer Res., 47, 1825-1829.
(21) ISO 10977. (1993). Photography - Processed photographic colour films and paper prints - Methods
for measuring image stability.
(22) Sunscreen Testing (UV.B) TECHNICALREPORT, CIE, International Commission on Illumnation,
Publication No. 90, Vienna, 1993, ISBN 3 900 734 275
(23) ZEBET/ECVAM/COLIPA - Standard Operating Procedure: In Vitro 3T3 NRU Phototoxicity Test.
Final Version, 7 September, 1998. 18 pgs.
(24) Spielmann, H., Balls, M., Dupuis, J., Pape, W.J.W., De Silva, O., Holzhütter, H.G., Gerberick, F.,
Liebsch, M., Lovell, W.W., and Pfannenbecker, U. (1998) A study on UV filter chemicals from Annex
VII of the European Union Directive 76/768/EEC, in the in vitro 3T3 NRU phototoxicity test. ATLA
26, 679-708.
(25) Holzhütter, H.G., and Quedenau, J. (1995) Mathematical modeling of cellular responses to external
signals. J. Biol. Systems 3, 127-138.
(26) Holzhütter, H.G. (1997). A general measure of in vitro phototoxicity derived from pairs of dose-
response curves and its use for predicting the in vivo phototoxicity of chemicals. ATLA, 25, 445-462.
(27) Software to be used with TG 432: phototox version 2.0
http://www.oecd.org/env/ehs/testing/section4software.htm
(28) INVITTOX Protocol 78. 3T3 Neutral Red Uptake (NRU) Phototoxicity Assay. ECVAM DB-ALM;
2008. http://ecvam-dbalm.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
(29) Baker C. S., 1998. Crystallization of neutral red vital stain from minimum essential medium due to
pH instability. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1998 Sep;34(8):607-8

-- 16 of 20 --

16 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
D 2019
©OECD 2019
Annex A. DEFINITIONS
Mixture: A mixture or a solution composed of two or more chemicals in which they do not
react (4).
Irradiance: the intensity of ultraviolet (UV) or visible light incident on a surface, measured
in W/m2 or mW/cm2.
Dose of light: the quantity (= intensity x time) of ultraviolet (UV) or visible radiation incident
on a surface, expressed in Joules (= W x s) per surface area, e.g., J/m2 or J/cm2.
UV light wavebands: the designations recommended by the CIE (Commission
Internationale de L’Eclairage) are: UVA (315-400nm) UVB (280-315nm) and UVC (100-
280nm). Other designations are also used; the division between UVB and UVA is often
placed at 320nm, and the UVA may be divided into UV-A1 and UV-A2 with a division made
at about 340nm.
Cell viability: parameter measuring total activity of a cell population (e.g., uptake of the vital
dye Neutral Red into cellular lysosomes), which, depending on the endpoint measured and
the test design used, correlates with the total number and/or vitality of the cells.
Relative cell viability: cell viability expressed in relation to solvent (negative) controls
which have been taken through the whole test procedure (either +Irr or -Irr) but not treated
with test chemical.
MEC (Molar Extinction/absorption Coefficient): a constant for any given molecule under a
specific set of conditions (e.g. solvent, temperature, and wavelength) and reflects the
efficiency with which a molecule can absorb a photon (typically expressed as L⋅mol-1⋅cm-1).
PIF (Photo-Irritation-Factor): factor generated by comparing two equally effective cytotoxic
concentrations (IC50) of the test chemical obtained in the absence (-Irr) and in the presence
(+Irr) of a non-cytotoxic irradiation with UVA/vis light.
IC50: the concentration of the test chemical by which the cell viability is reduced by 50%
MPE (Mean-Photo-Effect): measurement derived from mathematical analysis of the
concentration response curves obtained in the absence (-Irr) and in the presence (+Irr) of a
non-cytotoxic irradiation with UVA/vis light.
Phototoxicity: acute toxic response that is elicited after the first exposure of skin to certain
chemicals and subsequent exposure to light, or that is induced similarly by skin irradiation
after systemic administration of a chemical.

-- 17 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 17
©OECD 2019
Annex B. The role of the 3T3 NRU test in a sequential approach to the
phototoxicity testing of chemicals.
Note: In some regulatory guidelines, older threshold MEC values may have been used. The MEC > 1000
L mole-1cm-1 is based on scientific data (5), but when in doubt, regulatory authorities should be consulted.
UV/vis
absorption spectra
in appropriate solvent
(e.g. OECD
TG 101)
Absorption
[i.e., MEC >1000 L mol-1 cm-1 (5)]
No absorption
[i.e., MEC < 1000 L mol-1 cm-1 (5)]
Phototoxicity Testing
not considered
necessary
Initial Evaluation of the Physical, Chemical, and Toxicological Properties of the Test Chemical
• Physico-chemical properties
• Chemical structure, structural alerts
• UV/vis - absorption
• QSAR - photochemistry
• General toxicity (including kinetics and metabolism)
In Vitro 3T3 NRU Phototoxicity Test
and/or other methods if necessary

-- 18 of 20 --

18 │ 432 OECD/OCDE
©OECD 2019
Annex C.
Figure 1. Spectral power distribution of a filtered solar simulator.
See paragraph 22. Figure 1 gives an example of an acceptable spectral power distribution of a filtered solar
simulator. It is from the doped metal halide source used in the validation trial of the 3T3 NRU PT (6)(8)(17).
The effect of two different filters and the additional filtering effect of the lid of a 96-well cell culture plate are
shown. The H2 filter was only used with test systems that can tolerate a higher amount of UVB (skin model
test and red blood cell photo-hemolysis test). In the 3T3 NRU-PT the H1 filter was used. The figure shows that
additional filtering effect of the plate lid is mainly observed in the UVB range, still leaving enough UVB in the
irradiation spectrum to excite chemicals typically absorbing in the UVB range, like Amiodarone (see Table 2).

-- 19 of 20 --

OECD/OCDE 432 │ 19
©OECD 2019
Figure 2. Irradiation sensitivity of BALB/c 3T3 (as measured in the UVA range)
See paragraphs 24, 28, 29. Sensitivity of BALB/c 3T3 cells to irradiation with the solar simulator used in the
validation trial of the 3T3NRU-Phototoxicity Test, as measured in the UVA range. Figure shows the results
obtained in 7 different laboratories in the pre-validation study (1). While the two curves with open symbols
were obtained with cells from a high passage number that were replaced with new cell stocks, the curves with
bold symbols show cells with acceptable irradiation tolerance. From these data the highest non-cytotoxic
irradiation dose of 5 J/cm² was derived (vertical dashed line). The horizontal dashed line shows in addition the
maximum acceptable irradiation effect given in paragraph 29.

-- 20 of 20 --

