[SOURCE URL] https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2016/07/test-no-473-in-vitro-mammalian-chromosomal-aberration-test_g1g6ed0e/9789264264649-en.pdf
[CHARS] 52613

OECD/OCDE 473
Adopted:
29 July 2016
1
© OECD, (2016)
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/.
This Guideline was adopted by the OECD Council by written procedure on 29 July 2016 [C(2016)103].
OECD GUIDELINE FOR THE TESTING OF CHEMICALS
In Vitro Mammalian Chromosomal Aberration Test
INTRODUCTION
1. The OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals are periodically reviewed in light of scientific
progress, changing regulatory needs, and animal welfare considerations. The original Test Guideline 473
was adopted in 1983. In 1997 a revised version was issued, based on scientific progress made to that date.
This modified version of Test Guideline reflects nearly thirty years of experience with this test and the
interpretation of the data. This Test Guideline is part of a series of Test Guidelines on genetic toxicology.
A document that provides succinct information on genetic toxicology testing and an overview of the recent
changes that were made to these Test Guidelines has been developed (1).
2. The purpose of the in vitro chromosomal aberration test is to identify substances that cause
structural chromosomal aberrations in cultured mammalian cells (2) (3) (4). Structural aberrations may be
of two types, chromosome or chromatid. Polyploidy (including endoreduplication) could arise in
chromosome aberration assays in vitro. While aneugens can induce polyploidy, polyploidy alone does not
indicate aneugenic potential and can simply indicate cell cycle perturbation or cytotoxicity (5). This test is
not designed to measure aneuploidy. An in vitro micronucleus test (6) would be recommended for the
detection of aneuploidy.
3. The in vitro chromosomal aberration test may employ cultures of established cell lines or primary
cell cultures of human or rodent origin. The cells used should be selected on the basis of growth ability in
culture, stability of the karyotype (including chromosome number) and spontaneous frequency of
chromosomal aberrations (7). At the present time, the available data do not allow firm recommendations to
be made but suggest it is important, when evaluating chemical hazards to consider the p53 status, genetic
(karyotype) stability, DNA repair capacity and origin (rodent versus human) of the cells chosen for testing.
The users of this Test Guideline are thus encouraged to consider the influence of these and other cell
characteristics on the performance of a cell line in detecting the induction of chromosomal aberrations, as
knowledge evolves in this area.
4. Definitions used are provided in Annex 1.

-- 1 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
2
© OECD, (2016)
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
5. Tests conducted in vitro generally require the use of an exogenous source of metabolic activation
unless the cells are metabolically competent with respect to the test substances. The exogenous metabolic
activation system does not entirely mimic in vivo conditions. Care should be taken to avoid conditions that
could lead to artifactual positive results, i.e. chromosome damage not caused by direct interaction between
the test chemicals and chromosomes; such conditions include changes in pH or osmolality (8) (9) (10),
interaction with the medium components (11) (12) or excessive levels of cytotoxicity (13) (14) (15) (16).
6. This test is used to detect chromosomal aberrations that may result from clastogenic events. The
analysis of chromosomal aberration induction should be done using cells in metaphase. It is thus essential
that cells should reach mitosis both in treated and in untreated cultures. For manufactured nanomaterials,
specific adaptations of this Test Guideline may be needed but are not described in this Test Guideline.
7. Before use of the Test Guideline on a mixture for generating data for an intended regulatory
purpose, it should be considered whether, and if so why, it may provide adequate results for that purpose.
Such considerations are not needed, when there is a regulatory requirement for testing of the mixture.
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST
8. Cell cultures of human or other mammalian origin are exposed to the test chemical both with and
without an exogenous source of metabolic activation unless cells with an adequate metabolizing capability
are used (see paragraph 13). At an appropriate predetermined intervals after the start of exposure of cell
cultures to the test chemical, they are treated with a metaphase-arresting substance (e.g. Colcemid® or
colchicine), harvested, stained and metaphase cells are analysed microscopically for the presence of
chromatid-type and chromosome-type aberrations.
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD
Preparations
Cells
9. A variety of cell lines (e.g. Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO), Chinese Hamster lung V79, Chinese
Hamster Lung (CHL)/IU, TK6) or primary cell cultures, including human or other mammalian peripheral
blood lymphocytes, can be used (7). The choice of the cell lines used should be scientifically justified.
When primary cells are used, for animal welfare reasons, the use of primary cells from human origin
should be considered where feasible and sampled in accordance with the human ethical principles and
regulations. Human peripheral blood lymphocytes should be obtained from young (approximately 18-35
years of age), non-smoking individuals with no known illness or recent exposures to genotoxic agents (e.g.
chemicals, ionizing radiations) at levels that would increase the background incidence of chromosomal
aberrations. This would ensure the background incidence of chromosomal aberrations to be low and
consistent. The baseline incidence of chromosomal aberrations increases with age and this trend is more
marked in females than in males (17) (18). If cells from more than one donor are pooled for use, the
number of donors should be specified. It is necessary to demonstrate that the cells have divided from the
beginning of treatment with the test chemical to cell sampling. Cell cultures are maintained in an
exponential cell growth phase (cell lines) or stimulated to divide (primary cultures of lymphocytes), to

-- 2 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
3
© OECD, (2016)
expose the cells at different stages of the cell cycle, since the sensitivity of cell stages to the test substances
may not be known. The primary cells that need to be stimulated with mitogenic agents in order to divide
are generally no longer synchronized during exposure to the test chemical (e.g. human lymphocytes after a
48-hour mitogenic stimulation). The use of synchronized cells during treatment is not recommended, but
can be acceptable if justified.
Media and culture conditions
10. Appropriate culture medium and incubation conditions (culture vessels, humidified atmosphere of
5% CO2 if appropriate, incubation temperature of 37°C) should be used for maintaining cultures. Cell lines
should be checked routinely for the stability of the modal chromosome number and the absence of
Mycoplasma contamination (7) (19), and cells should not be used if contaminated or if the modal
chromosome number has changed. The normal cell cycle time of cell lines or primary cultures used in the
testing laboratory should be established and should be consistent with the published cell characteristics
(20).
Preparation of cultures
11. Cell lines: cells are propagated from stock cultures, seeded in culture medium at a density such that
the cells in suspensions or in monolayers will continue to grow exponentially until harvest time (e.g.
confluence should be avoided for cells growing in monolayers).
12. Lymphocytes: whole blood treated with an anti-coagulant (e.g. heparin) or separated lymphocytes
are cultured (e.g. for 48 hours for human lymphocytes) in the presence of a mitogen mitogen [e.g.
phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) for human lymphocytes] in order to induce cell division prior to exposure to
the test chemical.
Metabolic activation
13. Exogenous metabolising systems should be used when employing cells which have inadequate
endogenous metabolic capacity. The most commonly used system that is recommended by default, unless
otherwise justified, is a co-factor-supplemented post-mitochondrial fraction (S9) prepared from the livers
of rodents (generally rats) treated with enzyme-inducing agents such as Aroclor 1254 (21) (22) (23) or a
combination -naphthoflavone (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29). The latter combination
does not conflict with the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (30) and has been shown
to be as effective as Aroclor 1254 for inducing mixed-function oxidases (24) (25) (26) (28). The S9
fraction typically is used at concentrations ranging from 1 to 2% (v/v) but may be increased to 10% (v/v) in
the final test medium. The use of products that reduce the mitotic index, especially calcium complexing
products (31) should be avoided during treatment. The choice of type and concentration of exogenous
metabolic activation system or metabolic inducer employed may be influenced by the class of substances
being tested.
Test chemical preparation
14. Solid test chemicals should be prepared in appropriate solvents and diluted, if appropriate, prior to
treatment of the cells (see paragraph 23). Liquid test chemicals may be added directly to the test system
and/or diluted prior to treatment of the test system. Gaseous or volatile test chemicals should be tested by
appropriate modifications to the standard protocols, such as treatment in sealed culture vessels (32) (33)

-- 3 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
4
© OECD, (2016)
(34). Preparations of the test chemical should be made just prior to treatment unless stability data
demonstrate the acceptability of storage.

-- 4 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
5
© OECD, (2016)
Test conditions
Solvents
15. The solvent should be chosen to optimize the solubility of the test substances without adversely
impacting the conduct of the assay, e.g. changing cell growth, affecting the integrity of the test chemical,
reacting with culture vessels, impairing the metabolic activation system. It is recommended that, wherever
possible, the use of an aqueous solvent (or culture medium) should be considered first. Well established
solvents are for example water or dimethyl sulfoxide. Generally organic solvents should not exceed 1%
(v/v) and aqueous solvents (saline or water) should not exceed 10% (v/v) in the final treatment medium. If
not well-established solvents are used (e.g. ethanol or acetone), their use should be supported by data
indicating their compatibility with the test chemicals, the test system and their lack of genetic toxicity at
the concentration used. In the absence of that supporting data, it is important to include untreated controls
(see Annex 1) to demonstrate that no deleterious or clastogenic effects are induced by the chosen solvent.
Measuring cell proliferation and cytotoxicity and choosing treatment concentrations
16. When determining the highest test chemical concentration, concentrations that have the capability
of producing artifactual positive responses, such as those producing excessive cytotoxicity (see paragraph
22), precipitation in the culture medium (see paragraph 23), or marked changes in pH or osmolality (see
paragraph 5), should be avoided. If the test chemical causes a marked change in the pH of the medium at
the time of addition, the pH might be adjusted by buffering the final treatment medium so as to avoid
artifactual positive results and to maintain appropriate culture conditions.
17. Measurements of cell proliferation are made to assure that a sufficient number of treated cells
have reached mitosis during the test and that the treatments are conducted at appropriate levels of
cytotoxicity (see paragraphs 18 and 22). Cytotoxicity should be determined with and without metabolic
activation in the main experiment using an appropriate indication of cell death and growth. While the
evaluation of cytotoxicity in an initial test may be useful to better define the concentrations to be used in
the main experiment, an initial test is not mandatory. If performed, it should not replace the measurement
of cytotoxicity in the main experiment.
18. Relative Population Doubling (RPD) or Relative Increase in Cell Count (RICC) are appropriate
methods for the assessment of cytotoxicity in cytogenetic tests (13) (15) (35) (36) (55) (see Annex 2 for
formulas). In case of long-term treatment and sampling times after the beginning of treatment longer than
1.5 normal cell cycle lengths (i.e. longer than 3 cell cycle lengths in total), RPD might underestimate
cytotoxicity (37). Under these circumstances RICC might be a better measure or the evaluation of
cytotoxicity after 1.5 normal cell cycle lengths would be a helpful estimate using RPD.
19. For lymphocytes in primary cultures, while the mitotic index (MI) is a measure of
cytotoxic/cytostatic effects, it is influenced by the time after treatment it is measured, the mitogen used and
possible cell cycle disruption. However, the MI is acceptable because other cytotoxicity measurements
may be cumbersome and impractical and may not apply to the target population of lymphocytes growing in
response to PHA stimulation.
20. While RICC and RPD for cell lines and MI for primary culture of lymphocytes are the
recommended cytotoxicity parameters, other indicators (e.g. cell integrity, apoptosis, necrosis, cell cycle)
could provide useful additional information.

-- 5 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
6
© OECD, (2016)
21. At least three test concentrations (not including the solvent and positive controls) that meet the
acceptability criteria (appropriate cytotoxicity, number of cells, etc) should be evaluated. Whatever the
types of cells (cell lines or primary cultures of lymphocytes), either replicate or single treated cultures may
be used at each concentration tested. While the use of duplicate cultures is advisable, single cultures are
also acceptable provided that the same total number of cells are scored for either single or duplicate
cultures. The use of single cultures is particularly relevant when more than 3 concentrations are assessed
(see paragraph 31). The results obtained in the independent replicate cultures at a given concentration can
be pooled for the data analysis (38). For test chemicals demonstrating little or no cytotoxicity,
concentration intervals of approximately 2 to 3 fold will usually be appropriate. Where cytotoxicity occurs,
the test concentrations selected should cover a range from that producing cytotoxicity as described in
paragraph 22 and including concentrations at which there is moderate and little or no cytotoxicity. Many
test chemicals exhibit steep concentration response curves and in order to obtain data at low and moderate
cytotoxicity or to study the dose response relationship in detail, it will be necessary to use more closely
spaced concentrations and/or more than three concentrations (single cultures or replicates), in particular in
situations where a repeat experiment is required (see paragraph 47).
22. If the maximum concentration is based on cytotoxicity, the highest concentration should aim to
achieve 55 ± 5% cytotoxicity using the recommended cytotoxicity parameters (i.e. reduction in RICC and
RPD for cell lines and reduction in MI for primary cultures of lymphocytes to 45± 5% of the concurrent
negative control). Care should be taken in interpreting positive results only to be found in the higher end of
this 55 ± 5% cytotoxicity range (13).
23. For poorly soluble test chemicals that are not cytotoxic at concentrations lower than the lowest
insoluble concentration, the highest concentration analysed should produce turbidity or a precipitate visible
by eye or with the aid of an inverted microscope at the end of the treatment with the test chemical. Even if
cytotoxicity occurs above the lowest insoluble concentration, it is advisable to test at only one
concentration producing turbidity or with a visible precipitate because artifactual effects may result from
the precipitate. At the concentration producing a precipitate, care should be taken to assure that the
precipitate does not interfere with the conduct of the test (e.g. staining or scoring). The determination of
solubility in the culture medium prior to the experiment may be useful.
24. If no precipitate or limiting cytotoxicity is observed, the highest test concentration should
correspond to 10 mM, 2 mg/mL or 2 μl/mL, whichever is the lowest (39) (40) (41). When the test chemical
is not of defined composition e.g. substance of unknown or variable composition, complex reaction
products or biological materials (i.e. UVCBs) (42), environmental extracts etc., the top concentration may
need to be higher (e.g. 5 mg/ml), in the absence of sufficient cytotoxicity, to increase the concentration of
each of the components. It should be noted however that these requirements may differ for human
pharmaceuticals (43).
Controls
25. Concurrent negative controls (see paragraph 15), consisting of solvent alone in the treatment
medium and treated in the same way as the treatment cultures, should be included for every harvest time.
26. Concurrent positive controls are needed to demonstrate the ability of the laboratory to identify
clastogens under the conditions of the test protocol used and the effectiveness of the exogenous metabolic
activation system, when applicable. Examples of positive controls are given in the table 1 below.
Alternative positive control substances can be used, if justified. Because in vitro mammalian cell tests for
genetic toxicity are sufficiently standardized, the use of positive controls may be confined to a clastogen

-- 6 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
7
© OECD, (2016)
requiring metabolic activation. Provided it is done concurrently with the non-activated test using the same
treatment duration, this single positive control response will demonstrate both the activity of the metabolic
activation system and the responsiveness of the test system. Long term treatment (without S9) should
however have its own positive control as the treatment duration will differ from the test using metabolic
activation. Each positive control should be used at one or more concentrations expected to give
reproducible and detectable increases over background in order to demonstrate the sensitivity of the test
system (i.e. the effects are clear but do not immediately reveal the identity of the coded slides to the
reader), and the response should not be compromised by cytotoxicity exceeding the limits specified in the
Test Guideline.
Table 1. Reference substances recommended for assessing laboratory proficiency and for selection of
positive controls.
Category Substance CASRN
1. Clastogens active without metabolic activation
Methyl methanesulphonate 66-27-3
Mitomycin C 50-07-7
4-Nitroquinoline-N-Oxide 56-57-5
Cytosine arabinoside 147-94-4
2. Clastogens requiring metabolic activation
Benzo(a)pyrene 50-32-8
Cyclophosphamide 50-18-0
PROCEDURE
Treatment with test chemical
27. Proliferating cells are treated with the test chemical in the presence and absence of a metabolic
activation system.
Culture harvest time
28. For thorough evaluation, which would be needed to conclude a negative outcome, all three of the
following experimental conditions should be conducted using a short term treatment with and without
metabolic activation and long term treatment without metabolic activation (see paragraphs 43, 44 and 45):
Cells should be exposed to the test chemical without metabolic activation for 3-6 hours, and
sampled at a time equivalent to about 1.5 normal cell cycle lengths after the beginning of treatment
(18),
Cells should be exposed to the test chemical with metabolic activation for 3-6 hours, and sampled
at a time equivalent to about 1.5 normal cell cycle lengths after the beginning of treatment (18),
Cells should be continuously exposed without metabolic activation until sampling at a time
equivalent to about 1.5 normal cell cycle lengths. Certain substances (e.g. nucleoside analogues)
may be more readily detected by treatment/sampling times longer than 1.5 normal cell cycle
lengths (24).

-- 7 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
8
© OECD, (2016)
In the event that any of the above experimental conditions lead to a positive response, it may not be
necessary to investigate any of the other treatment regimens.

-- 8 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
9
© OECD, (2016)
Chromosome preparation
29. Cell cultures are treated with Colcemid® or colchicine usually for one to three hours prior to
harvesting. Each cell culture is harvested and processed separately for the preparation of chromosomes.
Chromosome preparation involves hypotonic treatment of the cells, fixation and staining. In monolayers,
mitotic cells (identifiable as being round and detaching from the surface) may be present at the end of the
3-6 hour treatment. Because these mitotic cells are easily detached, they can be lost when the medium
containing the test chemical is removed. If there is evidence for a substantial increase in the number of
mitotic cells compared with controls, indicating likely mitotic arrest, then the cells should be collected by
centrifugation and added back to cultures, to avoid losing cells that are in mitosis, and at risk for
chromosome aberration, at the time of harvest.
Analysis
30. All slides, including those of the positive and negative controls, should be independently coded
before microscopic analysis for chromosomal aberrations. Since fixation procedures often result in a
proportion of metaphase cells which have lost chromosomes, the cells scored should, therefore, contain a
number of centromeres equal to the modal number +/- 2.
31. At least 300 well-spread metaphases should be scored per concentration and control to conclude a
test chemical as clearly negative (see paragraph 45). The 300 cells should be equally divided among the
replicates, when replicate cultures are used. When single cultures are used per concentration (see
paragraph 21), at least 300 well spread metaphases should be scored in this single culture. Scoring 300
cells has the advantage of increasing the statistical power of the test and in addition, zero values will be
rarely observed (expected to be only 5%) (44). The number of metaphases scored can be reduced when
high numbers of cells with chromosome aberrations are observed and the test chemical considered as
clearly positive.
32. Cells with structural chromosomal aberration(s) including and excluding gaps should be scored.
Breaks and gaps are defined in Annex 1 according to (45) (46). Chromatid- and chromosome-type
aberrations should be recorded separately and classified by sub-types (breaks, exchanges). Procedures in
use in the laboratory should ensure that analysis of chromosomal aberrations is performed by well-trained
scorers and peer-reviewed if appropriate.
33. Although the purpose of the test is to detect structural chromosomal aberrations, it is important to
record polyploidy and endoreduplication frequencies when these events are seen. (See paragraph 2).
Proficiency of the laboratory
34. In order to establish sufficient experience with the test prior to using it for routine testing, the
laboratory should have performed a series of experiments with reference positive substances acting via
different mechanisms and various negative controls (using various solvents/vehicle). These positive and
negative control responses should be consistent with the literature. This is not applicable to laboratories
that have experience, i.e. that have an historical data base available as defined in paragraph 37.
35. A selection of positive control substances (see Table 1 in paragraph 26) should be investigated
with short and long treatments in the absence of metabolic activation, and also with short treatment in the
presence of metabolic activation, in order to demonstrate proficiency to detect clastogenic substances and
determine the effectiveness of the metabolic activation system. A range of concentrations of the selected

-- 9 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
10
© OECD, (2016)
substances should be chosen so as to give reproducible and concentration-related increases above the
background in order to demonstrate the sensitivity and dynamic range of the test system.
Historical control data
36. The laboratory should establish:
A historical positive control range and distribution,
A historical negative (untreated, solvent) control range and distribution.
37. When first acquiring data for an historical negative control distribution, concurrent negative
controls should be consistent with published control data, where they exist. As more experimental data are
added to the control distribution, concurrent negative controls should ideally be within the 95% control
limits of that distribution (44) (47
built with a minimum of 10 experiments but would preferably consist of at least 20 experiments conducted
under comparable experimental conditions. Laboratories should use quality control methods, such as
control charts (e.g. C-charts or X-bar charts (48)), to identify how variable their positive and negative
control data are, and to show that the methodology is 'under control' in their laboratory (44). Further
recommendations on how to build and use the historical data (i.e. criteria for inclusion and exclusion of
data in historical data and the acceptability criteria for a given experiment) can be found in the literature
(47).
38. Any changes to the experimental protocol should be considered in terms of their consistency with
result in the
establishment of a new historical control database.
39. Negative control data should consist of the incidence of cells with chromosome aberrations from a
single culture or the sum of replicate cultures as described in paragraph 21. Concurrent negative controls
control database (44) (47). Where concurrent negative control data fall outside the 95% control limits they
may be acceptable for inclusion in the historical control distribution as long as these data are not extreme
7) and evidence of
absence of technical or human failure.
DATA AND REPORTING
Presentation of the results
40. The percentage of cells with structural chromosomal aberration(s) should be evaluated. Chromatid-
and chromosome-type aberrations classified by sub-types (breaks, exchanges) should be listed separately
with their numbers and frequencies for experimental and control cultures. Gaps are recorded and reported
separately but not included in the total aberration frequency. Percentage of polyploidy and/or
endoreduplicated cells are reported when seen.
41. Concurrent measures of cytotoxicity for all treated, negative and positive control cultures in the
main aberration experiment(s) should be recorded.
42. Individual culture data should be provided. Additionally, all data should be summarised in tabular
form.

-- 10 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
11
© OECD, (2016)
Acceptability Criteria
43. Acceptance of a test is based on the following criteria:
The concurrent negative control is considered acceptable for addition to the laboratory historical
negative control database as described in paragraph 39.
Concurrent positive controls (see paragraph 26) should induce responses that are compatible with
those generated in the historical positive control data base and produce a statistically significant
increase compared with the concurrent negative control.
Cell proliferation criteria in the solvent control should be fulfilled (paragraphs 17 and 18).
All three experimental conditions were tested unless one resulted in positive results (see paragraph
28).
Adequate number of cells and concentrations are analysable (paragraphs 31 and 21).
The criteria for the selection of top concentration are consistent with those described in paragraphs
22, 23 and 24.
Evaluation and interpretation of results
44. Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered to be clearly
positive if, in any of the experimental conditions examined (see paragraph 28):
a) at least one of the test concentrations exhibits a statistically significant increase compared with the
concurrent negative control,
b) the increase is dose-related when evaluated with an appropriate trend test,
c) any of the results are outside the distribution of the historical negative control data (e.g. Poisson-
based 95% control limits; see paragraph 39).
When all of these criteria are met, the test chemical is then considered able to induce chromosomal
aberrations in cultured mammalian cells in this test system. Recommendations for the most appropriate
statistical methods can be found in the literature (49) (50) (51).
45. Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered clearly negative
if, in all experimental conditions examined (see paragraph 28):
a) none of the test concentrations exhibits a statistically significant increase compared with the
concurrent negative control,
b) there is no concentration-related increase when evaluated with an appropriate trend test,
c) all results are inside the distribution of the historical negative control data (e.g. Poisson-based 95%
control limits; see paragraph 39).
The test chemical is then considered unable to induce chromosomal aberrations in cultured mammalian
cells in this test system.
46. There is no requirement for verification of a clearly positive or negative response.
47. In case the response is neither clearly negative nor clearly positive as described above or in order
to assist in establishing the biological relevance of a result, the data should be evaluated by expert

-- 11 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
12
© OECD, (2016)
judgement and/or further investigations. Scoring additional cells (where appropriate) or performing a
repeat experiment possibly using modified experimental conditions (e.g. concentration spacing, other
metabolic activation conditions [i.e. S9 concentration or S9 origin]) could be useful.
48. In rare cases, even after further investigations, the data set will preclude making a conclusion of
positive or negative results, and therefore the test chemical response will be concluded to be equivocal.
49. An increase in the number of polyploid cells may indicate that the test substances have the
potential to inhibit mitotic processes and to induce numerical chromosomal aberrations (52). An increase in
the number of cells with endoreduplicated chromosomes may indicate that the test substances have the
potential to inhibit cell cycle progress (53) (54) (see paragraph 2). Therefore incidence of polyploid cells
and cells with endoreduplicated chromosomes should be recorded separately.
Test report
50. The test report should include the following information:
Test chemical:
- source, lot number, limit date for use, if available
- stability of the test chemical itself, if known;
- solubility and stability of the test chemical in solvent, if known.
- measurement of pH, osmolality and precipitate in the culture medium to which the test
chemical was added, as appropriate.
Mono-constituent substance:
- physical appearance, water solubility, and additional relevant physicochemical properties;
- chemical identification, such as IUPAC or CAS name, CAS number, SMILES or InChI code,
structural formula, purity, chemical identity of impurities as appropriate and practically
feasible, etc.
Multi-constituent substance, UVBCs and mixtures:
- characterised as far as possible by chemical identity (see above), quantitative occurrence and
relevant physicochemical properties of the constituents.
Solvent:
- justification for choice of solvent.
- percentage of solvent in the final culture medium should also be indicated.
Cells:
- type and source of cells
- karyotype features and suitability of the cell type used;
- absence of mycoplasma, for cell lines;
- for cell lines, information on cell cycle length, doubling time or proliferation index;
- sex of blood donors, age and any relevant information on the donor, whole blood or separated
lymphocytes, mitogen used;

-- 12 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
13
© OECD, (2016)
- number of passages, if available, for cell lines;
- methods for maintenance of cell cultures, for cell lines;
- modal number of chromosomes, for cell lines.
Test conditions:
- identity of the metaphase-arresting substance, its concentration and duration of cell exposure;
- concentration of test chemical expressed as final concentration in the culture medium (e.g. μg
or mg/mL or mM of culture medium).
- rationale for selection of concentrations and number of cultures including, e.g. cytotoxicity data
and solubility limitations;
- composition of media, CO2 concentration if applicable, humidity level;
- concentration (and/or volume) of solvent and test chemical added in the culture medium;
- incubation temperature;
- incubation time;
- duration of treatment;
- harvest time after treatment;
- cell density at seeding, if appropriate;
- type and composition of metabolic activation system (source of S9, method of preparation of
the S9 mix, the concentration or volume of S9 mix and S9 in the final culture medium, quality
controls of S9);
- positive and negative control substances, final concentrations for each conditions of treatment;
- methods of slide preparation and staining technique used;
- criteria for acceptability of assays;
- criteria for scoring aberrations;
- number of metaphases analysed;
- methods for the measurements of cytotoxicity;
- any supplementary information relevant to cytotoxicity and method used;
- criteria for considering studies as positive, negative or equivocal;
- methods used to determine pH, osmolality and precipitation.
Results:
- the number of cells treated and the number of cells harvested for each culture when cell lines
are used
- cytotoxicity measurements, e.g. RPD, RICC, MI, other observations if any;
- information on cell cycle length, doubling time or proliferation index in case of cell lines;
- signs of precipitation and time of the determination;
- definition for aberrations, including gaps;
- Number of cells scored, number of cells with chromosomal aberrations and type of
chromosomal aberrations given separately for each treated and control culture, including and
excluding gaps;
- changes in ploidy (polyploid cells and cells with endoreduplicated chromosomes, given
separately) if seen;
- concentration-response relationship, where possible;
- concurrent negative (solvent) and positive control data (concentrations and solvents);
- historical negative (solvent) and positive control data, with ranges, means and standard
deviations and 95% control limits for the distribution, as well as the number of data;
- statistical analyses, p-values if any.

-- 13 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
14
© OECD, (2016)
Discussion of the results.
Conclusions.

-- 14 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
15
© OECD, (2016)
LITERATURE
(1) OECD (2016). Overview of the set of OECD Genetic Toxicology Test Guidelines and updates
performed in 2014-2015. ENV Publications. Series on Testing and Assessment, No. 234, OECD,
Paris.
(2) Chemical
Mutagens, Principles and Methods for their Detection, Vol. 4, Hollaender, A. (ed.), Plenum Press,
New York and London, pp. 1-29
(3) Ishidate, M. Jr., T. Sofuni (1985),
Progress in Mutation Research, Vol. 5, Ashby,
J. et al. (eds.), Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam-New York- Oxford, pp. 427-432.
(4) Galloway, S.M. et al. (1987), Chromosomal aberration and sister chromatid exchanges in Chinese
hamster ovary cells: Evaluation of 108 chemicals, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol.
10/suppl. 10, pp. 1-175.
(5) Muehlbauer, P.A. et al. ose selection and identification of aneugens in the in
vitro chromosome aberration test by integration of flow cytometry-based methods, Environmental
and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 49/4, pp. 318-327.
(6) OECD (2014), Test No. 487: In Vitro Mammalian Cell Micronucleus Test, OECD Guidelines for
the Testing of Chemicals, Section 4, OECD Publishing, Paris.
(7) ILSI paper (draft), Lorge, E., M. Moore, J. Clements, M. O Donovan, F. Darroudi, M. Honma, A.
Czich, J van Benthem, S. Galloway, V. Thybaud, B. Gollapudi, M. Aardema, J. Kim, D.J.
Kirkland, Recommendations for good cell culture practices in genotoxicity testing.
(8) Scott, D. et al. (1991), Genotoxicity under Extreme Culture Conditions. A report from ICPEMC
Task Group 9, Mutation Research/Reviews in Genetic Toxicology, Vol.257/2, pp. 147-204.
(9) Morita, T. et al. (1992), Clastogenicity of Low pH to Various Cultured Mammalian Cells, Mutation
Research/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol. 268/2, pp. 297-305.
(10) Brusick, D. (1986), Genotoxic effects in cultured mammalian cells produced by low pH treatment
conditions and increased ion concentrations, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 8/6,
pp. 789-886.
(11) Long, L.H. et al. (2007), Different cytotoxic and clastogenic effects of epigallocatechin gallate in
various cell-culture media due to variable rates of its oxidation in the culture medium, Mutation
Research/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol. 634/1-2, pp. 177-183.
(12) Nesslany, F. et al. (2008), Characterization of the Genotoxicity of Nitrilotriacetic Acid,
Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 49/6, pp. 439-452.

-- 15 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
16
© OECD, (2016)
(13) Galloway, S. (2000), Cytotoxicity and chromosome aberrations in vitro: Experience in industry
and the case for an upper limit on toxicity in the aberration assay, Environmental and Molecular
Mutagenesis, Vol. 35/3, pp. 191-201.
(14) Kirkland, D. et al. (2005), Evaluation of the ability of a battery of three in vitro genotoxicity tests
to discriminate rodent carcinogens and non-carcinogens. I: Sensitivity, specificity and relative
predictivity, Mutation Research/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol. 584/1-
2, pp. 1 256.
(15) Greenwood, S. et al. (2004), Population doubling: a simple and more accurate estimation of cell
growth suppression in the in vitro assay for chromosomal aberrations that reduces irrelevant
positive results, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 43/1, pp. 36 44.
(16) Hilliard, C.A. et al. (1998), Chromosome aberrations in vitro related to cytotoxicity of
nonmutagenic chemicals and metabolic poisons, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol.
31/4, pp. 316 326.
(17) Hedner K. et al. (1982), Sister chromatid exchanges and structural chromosomal aberrations in
relation to age and sex, Human Genetics, Vol. 62, pp. 305-309.
(18) Ramsey M.J. et al. (1995), The effects of age and lifestyle factors on the accumulation of
cytogenetic damage as measured by chromosome painting, Mutation Research, Vol. 338, pp. 95-
106.
(19) Coecke S. et al. (2005), Guidance on Good Cell Culture Practice. A Report of the Second ECVAM
Task Force on Good Cell Culture Practice, ATLA, Vol. 33/3, pp. 261-287.
(20) Henderson, L. et al. (1997), Industrial Genotoxicology Group collaborative trial to investigate cell
cycle parameters in human lymphocyte cytogenetics studies, Mutagenesis, Vol.12/3, pp.163-167.
(21) Ames, B.N., J. McCann, E. Yamasaki (1975), Methods for Detecting Carcinogens and Mutagens
with the Salmonella/Mammalian Microsome Mutagenicity Test, Mutation Research/Environmental
Mutagenesis and Related Subjects, Vol. 31/6, pp. 347-363.
(22) Maron, D.M., B.N. Ames (1983), Revised Methods for the Salmonella Mutagenicity Test, Mutation
Research/Environmental Mutagenesis and Related Subjects, Vol. 113/3-4, pp. 173-215.
(23) Natarajan, A.T. et al. (1976), Cytogenetic Effects of Mutagens/Carcinogens after Activation in a
Microsomal System In Vitro, I. Induction of Chromosomal Aberrations and Sister Chromatid
Exchanges by Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) and Dimethylnitrosamine (DMN) in CHO Cells in the
Presence of Rat-Liver Microsomes, Mutation Research, Vol. 37/1, pp. 83-90.
(24) Matsuoka, A., M. Hayashi, M. Jr. Ishidate (1979), Chromosomal Aberration Tests on 29 Chemicals
Combined with S9 Mix In vitro, Mutation Research/Genetic Toxicology, Vol. 66/3, pp. 277-290.
(25) Ong, T.-m. et al. (1980), Differential effects of cytochrome P450-inducers on promutagen
activation capabilities and enzymatic activities of S-9 from rat liver, Journal of Environmental
Pathology and Toxicology, Vol. 4/1, pp. 55-65.

-- 16 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
17
© OECD, (2016)
(26) Elliot, B.M. et al. (1992), Report of UK Environmental Mutagen Society Working Party.
Alternatives to Aroclor 1254-induced S9 in In Vitro Genotoxicity Assays, Mutagenesis, Vol. 7/3, pp.
175-177.
(27)
In Vitro Metabolic Activation in Mutagenesis Testing, de Serres,
F.J. et al. (eds.), Elsevier, North-Holland, pp. 85-88.
(28) Galloway, S.M. et al. (1994). Report from Working Group on in Vitro Tests for Chromosomal
Aberrations, Mutation Research/Environmental Mutagenesis and Related Subjects, Vol. 312/3, pp.
241-261.
(29) Johnson, T.E., D.R. Umbenhauer, S.M. Galloway (1996), Human liver S-9 metabolic activation:
proficiency in cytogenetic assays and comparison with phenobarbital/beta-naphthoflavone or
Aroclor 1254 induced rat S-9, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 28/1, pp. 51-59.
(30) UNEP (2001), Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP). : http://www.pops.int/.
(31) Tucker, J.D., M.L. Christensen (1987), Effects of anticoagulants upon sister-chromatid exchanges,
cell-cycle kinetics, and mitotic index in human peripheral lymphocytes, Mutation Research, Vol.
190/3, pp. 225-8.
(32) Krahn, D.F.
Genotoxic Effects of Airborne Agents, Tice, R.R., D.L. Costa, K.M.
Schaich (eds.), Plenum, New York, pp. 91-103.
(33) Zamora, P.O. et al. (1983), Evaluation of an Exposure System Using Cells Grown on Collagen Gels
for Detecting Highly Volatile Mutagens in the CHO/HGPRT Mutation Assay, Environmental and
Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 5/6, pp. 795-801.
(34) Asakura, M. et al. (2008), An improved system for exposure of cultured mammalian cells to
gaseous compounds in the chromosomal aberration assay, Mutation Research, Vol. 652/2, pp. 122-
130.
(35) Lorge, E. et al. (2008), Comparison of different methods for an accurate assessment of cytotoxicity
in the in vitro micronucleus test. I. Theoretical aspects, Mutation Research/Genetic Toxicology and
Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol. 655/1-2, pp. 1-3.
(36) Galloway, S. et al. (2011), Workshop summary: Top concentration for in vitro mammalian cell
genotoxicity assays; and Report from working group on toxicity measures and top concentration
for in vitro cytogenetics assays (chromosome aberrations and micronucleus), Mutation
Research/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol. 723/2, pp. 77-83.
(37) Honma, M. (2011), Cytotoxicity measurement in in vitro chromosome aberration test and
micronucleus test, Mutation Research/Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis,
Vol. 724/1-2, pp. 86-87.

-- 17 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
18
© OECD, (2016)
(38) Richardson, C. et al. (1989), Analysis of Data from In Vitro Cytogenetic Assays. In:
Statistical Evaluation of Mutagenicity Test Data, Kirkland, D.J. (ed.) Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 141-154.
(39) OECD (2014), Document supporting the WNT decision to implement revised criteria for the
selection of the top concentration in the in vitro mammalian cell assays on genotoxicity (Test
Guidelines 473, 476 and 487) ENV/JM/TG(2014)17. Available upon request.
(40) Morita, T., M. Honma, K. Morikawa (2012), Effect of reducing the top concentration used in the in
vitro chromosomal aberration test in CHL cells on the evaluation of industrial chemical
genotoxicity, Mutation Research/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol. 741/1-
2, pp. 32-56.
(41) Brookmire, L., J.J. Chen, D.D. Levy (2013), Evaluation of the Highest Concentrations Used in the
In Vitro Chromosome Aberrations Assay, Environmental and Molecular Muagenesis, Vol. 54/1,
pp. 36-43.
(42) EPA, Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention (2011), Chemical Substances of
Unknown or Variable Composition, Complex Reaction Products and Biological Materials: UVCB
Substances, http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/newchems/pubs/uvcb.txt.
(43) USFDA (2012), International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Guidance S2 (R1) on
Genotoxicity Testing and Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended For Human Use.
: https://federalregister.gov/a/2012-13774.
(44)
OECD Environment, Health and Safety Publications (EHS), Series on Testing and Assessment,
No. 198, OECD Publishing, Paris.
(45) ISCN (2013), An International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature, Schaffer, L.G., J.
MacGowan-Gordon, M. Schmid (eds.), Karger Publishers Inc., Connecticut.
(46) Basic Mutagenicity
Tests: UKEMS Recommended Procedures, Kirkland, D.J. (ed.), Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 62-86.
(47) Hayashi, M. et al. (2011), Compilation and use of genetic toxicity historical control Data, Mutation
Research, Vol. 723/2, pp. 87-90.
(48) Ryan, T. P. (2000), Statistical Methods for Quality Improvement, 2nd Edition, John Wiley and
Sons, New York.
(49) Fleiss, J. L., B. Levin, M.C. Paik (2003), Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, 3rd ed.,
John Wiley & Sons, New York.
(50) Galloway, S.M. et al. (1987), Chromosome aberration and sister chromatid exchanges in Chinese
hamster ovary cells: Evaluation of 108 chemicals, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis,
Vol. 10/suppl. 10, pp. 1-175.

-- 18 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
19
© OECD, (2016)
(51) In Vitro Statistical
Evaluation of Mutagenicity Test Data, Kirkland, D.J. (ed.), Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 141-154.
(52) Warr, T.J., E.M. Parry, J.M. Parry (1993), A comparison of two in vitro mammalian cell
cytogenetic assays for the detection of mitotic aneuploidy using 10 known or suspected aneugens,
Mutation Research, Vol. 287/1, pp. 29-46.
(53) Locke-Huhle, C. (1983), Endoreduplication in Chinese hamster cells during alpha-radiation induced
G2 arrest, Mutation Research, Vol. 119/3, pp. 403-413.
(54) Huang, Y., C. Change, J.E. Trosko (1983), Aphidicolin - induced endoreduplication in Chinese
hamster cells, Cancer Research, Vol. 43/3, pp. 1362-1364.
(55) Soper, K.A., S.M. Galloway (1994), Cytotoxicity measurement in in vitro chromosome aberration
test and micronucleus test, Mutation Research, Vol. 312, pp. 139-149.

-- 19 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
20
© OECD, (2016)
ANNEX 1
DEFINITIONS
Aneuploidy: any deviation from the normal diploid (or haploid) number of chromosomes by a single
chromosome or more than one, but not by entire set(s) of chromosomes (polyploidy).
Apoptosis: programmed cell death characterized by a series of steps leading to a disintegration of cells into
membrane-bound particles that are then eliminated by phagocytosis or by shedding.
Cell proliferation: increase in cell number as a result of mitotic cell division.
Chromatid break: discontinuity of a single chromatid in which there is a clear misalignment of one of the
chromatids.
Chromatid gap: non-staining region (achromatic lesion) of a single chromatid in which there is minimal
misalignment of the chromatid.
Chromatid-type aberration: structural chromosome damage expressed as breakage of single chromatids or
breakage and reunion between chromatids.
Chromosome-type aberration: structural chromosome damage expressed as breakage, or breakage and
reunion, of both chromatids at an identical site.
Clastogen: any substance which causes structural chromosomal aberrations in populations of cells or
eukaryotic organisms.
Concentrations: refer to final concentrations of the test chemical in the culture medium.
Cytotoxicity: For the assays covered in this guideline using cell lines, cytotoxicity is identified as a
reduction in relative population doubling (RPD) or relative increase in cell count (RICC) of the treated
cells as compared to the negative control (see paragraph 17 and Annex 2).
For the assays covered in this guideline using primary cultures of lymphocytes, cytotoxicity is identified as
a reduction in mitotic index (MI) of the treated cells as compared to the negative control (see paragraph 18
and Annex 2).
Endoreduplication: a process in which after an S period of DNA replication, the nucleus does not go into
mitosis but starts another S period. The result is chromosomes with 4, 8, 16 , chromatids.
Genotoxic: a general term encompassing all types of DNA or chromosome damage, including breaks,
deletions, adducts, nucleotides modifications and linkages, rearrangements, gene mutations, chromosome
aberrations, and aneuploidy. Not all types of genotoxic effects result in mutations or stable chromosome
damage.
Mitotic index (MI): the ratio of cells in metaphase divided by the total number of cells observed in a
population of cells; an indication of the degree of proliferation of that population.

-- 20 of 22 --

OECD/OCDE 473
21
© OECD, (2016)
Mitosis: division of the cell nucleus usually divided into prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase and
telophase.
Mutagenic: produces a heritable change of DNA base-pair sequences(s) in genes or of the structure of
chromosomes (chromosome aberrations).
Numerical aberration: a change in the number of chromosomes from the normal number characteristic of the
cells utilised.
Polyploidy: numerical chromosomal aberrations in cells or organisms involving entire set(s) of
chromosomes, as opposed to an individual chromosome or chromosomes (aneuploidy).
p53 status: p53 protein is involved in cell cycle regulation, apoptosis and DNA repair. Cells deficient in
functional p53 protein, unable to arrest cell cycle or to eliminate damaged cells via apoptosis or other
mechanisms (e.g. induction of DNA repair) related to p53 functions in response to DNA damage, should
be theoretically more prone to gene mutations or chromosomal aberrations.
Relative Increase in Cell Counts (RICC): the increase in the number of cells in chemically-exposed
cultures versus increase in non-treated cultures, a ratio expressed as a percentage.
Relative Population Doubling (RPD): the increase in the number of population doublings in chemically-
exposed cultures versus increase in non-treated cultures, a ratio expressed as a percentage.
S9 liver fraction: supernatant of liver homogenate after 9000g centrifugation, i.e. raw liver extract.
S9 mix: mix of the S9 liver fraction and cofactors necessary for metabolic enzymes activity.
Solvent control: General term to define the control cultures receiving the solvent alone used to dissolve the
test chemical.
Structural aberration: a change in chromosome structure detectable by microscopic examination of the
metaphase stage of cell division, observed as deletions and fragments, intrachanges or interchanges.
Untreated controls: cultures that receive no treatment (i.e. no test chemical nor solvent) but are processed
concurrently in the same way as the cultures receiving the test chemical.

-- 21 of 22 --

473 OECD/OCDE
22
© OECD, (2016)
ANNEX 2
FORMULAS FOR CYTOTOXICITY ASSESSMENT
Mitotic index (MI):
Number of mitotic cells
MI (%) = ------------------------------------ × 100
Total number of cells scored
Relative Increase in Cell Counts (RICC) or Relative Population Doubling (RPD) is recommended,
as both take into account the proportion of the cell population which has divided.
(Increase in number of cells in treated cultures (final starting))
RICC (%) = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- × 100
(Increase in number of cells in control cultures (final starting))
(No. of Population doublings in treated cultures)
RPD (%) = ----------------------------------------------------------------- × 100
(No. of Population doublings in control cultures)
where:
Population Doubling = [log (Post-treatment cell number ÷ Initial cell number)] ÷ log 2
For example, a RICC, or a RPD of 53% indicates 47% cytotoxicity/cytostasis and
55% cytotoxicity/cytostasis measured by MI means that the actual MI is 45% of control.
In any case, the number of cells before treatment should be measured and the same for treated and negative
control cultures.
While RCC (i.e. Number of cells in treated cultures/ Number of cells in control cultures) had been used as
cytotoxicity parameter in the past, is no longer recommended because it can underestimate cytotoxicity
In the negative control cultures, population doubling should be compatible with the requirement to sample
cells after treatment at a time equivalent to about 1.5 normal cell cycle length and mitotic index should be
higher enough to get a sufficient number of cells in mitosis and to reliably calculate a 50% reduction.

-- 22 of 22 --

