[SOURCE URL] https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2016/07/test-no-490-in-vitro-mammalian-cell-gene-mutation-tests-using-the-thymidine-kinase-gene_g1g6fb2e/9789264264908-en.pdf
[CHARS] 73092

OECD/OCDE 490
Adopted:
29 July 2016
1
© OECD, (2016)
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/.
This Guideline was adopted by the OECD Council by written procedure on 29 July 2016 [C(2016)103].
OECD GUIDELINE FOR THE TESTING OF CHEMICALS
In Vitro Mammalian Cell Gene Mutation Tests Using the Thymidine Kinase Gene
INTRODUCTION
1. The OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals are periodically reviewed and revised in the
light of scientific progress, regulatory needs and animal welfare. The mouse lymphoma assay (MLA) and
TK6 test using the thymidine kinase (TK) locus were originally contained in Test Guideline 476 adopted in
1984 and revised in 1997, based on scientific progress made to that date. Subsequently, the MLA Expert
Workgroup of the International Workshop for Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT) has developed internationally
harmonized recommendations for assay acceptance criteria and data interpretation for the MLA (1) (2) (3)
(4) (5), and these recommendations are incorporated into this new Test Guideline (TG 490). TG 490 is
written for the MLA and, because it also utilizes the TK locus, the TK6. While the MLA has been widely
used for regulatory purposes, the TK6 has been used much less frequently. It should be noted that in spite
of the similarity between the endpoints the two cell lines are not interchangeable and regulatory programs
may validly express a preference for one over the other for a particular regulatory use. For instance, the
validation of the MLA demonstrated its appropriateness for detecting not only gene mutation, but also, the
ability of a test chemical to induce structural chromosomal damage. This Test Guideline is part of a series
of Test Guidelines on genetic toxicology. A document that provides succinct information on genetic
toxicology testing and an overview of the recent changes that were made to these Test Guidelines has been
developed (6).
2. The purpose of the in vitro mammalian cell gene mutation tests is to detect gene mutations
induced by chemicals. The cell lines used in these tests measure forward mutations in reporter genes,
specifically the endogeneous thymidine kinase gene (TK for human cells and Tk for rodent cells,
collectively referred to as TK in this Guideline). This Guideline is intended for use with two cell lines: the
L5178Y TK+/--3.7.2C mouse lymphoma cell line (generally called L5178Y) and the TK6 human
lymphoblastoid cell line (generally called TK6). Although the two cell lines vary because of their origin,
cell growth, p53-status, etc., the TK gene mutation tests can be conducted in a similar way in both cell
types as described in this guideline.
3. The autosomal and heterozygous nature of the thymidine kinase gene enables the detection of
viable colonies whose cells are deficient in the enzyme thymidine kinase following mutation from TK+/- to
TK-/-. This deficiency can result from genetic events affecting the TK gene including both gene mutations
(point mutations, frame-shift mutations, small deletions, etc.) and chromosomal events (large deletions,
chromosome rearrangements and mitotic recombination). The latter events are expressed as loss of
heterozygosity, which is a common genetic change of tumor suppressor genes in human tumorigenesis.
Theoretically, loss of the entire chromosome carrying the TK gene resulting from spindle impairment

-- 1 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
2
© OECD, (2016)
and/or mitotic non-disjunction can be detected in the MLA. Indeed, a combination of cytogenetic and
molecular analysis clearly shows that some MLA TK mutants are the result of nondisjunction. However,
the weight of evidence shows that the TK gene mutation tests cannot reliably detect aneugens when
applying standard cytotoxicity criteria (as described in this guideline) and therefore, it is not appropriate to
use these tests to detect aneugens (7) (8) (9).
4. In the TK gene mutation tests, two distinct phenotypic classes of TK mutants are generated; the
normal growing mutants that grow at the same rate as the TK heterozygous cells, and slow growing
mutants which grow with prolonged doubling times. The normal growing and slow growing mutants are
recognized as large colony and small colony mutants in the MLA and as early appearing colony and late
appearing colony mutants in the TK6. The molecular and cytogenetic nature of both large and small colony
MLA mutants has been explored in detail (8) (10) (11) (12) (13). The molecular and cytogenetic nature of
the early appearing and late appearing TK6 mutants has also been extensively investigated (14) (15) (16)
(17). Slow growing mutants for both cell types have suffered genetic damage that involves putative
growth regulating gene(s) near the TK locus which results in prolonged doubling times and the formation
of late appearing or small colonies (18). The induction of slow growing mutants has been associated with
substances that induce gross structural changes at the chromosomal level. Cells whose damage does not
involve the putative growth regulating gene(s) near the TK locus grow at rates similar to the parental cells
and become normal growing mutants. The induction of primarily normal growing mutants is associated
with substances primarily acting as point mutagens. Consequently it is essential to count both slow
growing and normal growing mutants in order to recover all of the mutants and to provide some insight
into the type(s) of damage (mutagens vs. clastogens) induced by the test chemical (10) (12) (18) (19).
5. The Test Guideline is organized so as to provide general information that applies to both MLA
and TK6 and specialised guidance for the individual tests.
6. Definitions used are provided in Annex 1.
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
7. Tests conducted in vitro generally require the use of an exogenous source of metabolic activation.
The exogenous metabolic activation system does not entirely mimic in vivo conditions.
8. Care should be taken to avoid conditions that could lead to artifactual positive results (i.e.
possible interaction with the test system) not caused by interaction between the test chemical and the
genetic material of the cell; such conditions include changes in pH or osmolality, interaction with the
medium components (20) (21), or excessive levels of cytotoxicity (22) (23) (24). Cytotoxicity exceeding
the recommended top cytotoxicity levels as defined in paragraph 28 is considered excessive for the MLA
and TK6. In addition, it should be noted that test chemicals that are thymidine analogues, or behave like
thymidine analogues can increase the mutant frequency by selective growth of the spontaneous background
mutants during cell treatment and require additional test methods for adequate evaluation (25).
9. For manufactured nanomaterials, specific adaptations of this Test Guideline may be needed but
are not described in this Test Guideline.
10. Before using the Test Guideline for testing a mixture to generate data for an intended regulatory
purpose, it should be considered whether, and if so why, it may provide adequate results for that purpose.
Such considerations are not needed, when there is a regulatory requirement for testing the mixture.
11. Mutant cells deficient in thymidine kinase enzyme activity because of a mutation TK+/- to TK-/-
are resistant to the cytostatic effects of the pyrimidine analogue trifluorothymidine (TFT). The TK

-- 2 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
3
© OECD, (2016)
proficient cells are sensitive to TFT, which causes the inhibition of cellular metabolism and halts further
cell division. Thus, mutant cells are able to proliferate in the presence of TFT and form visible colonies,
whereas cells containing the TK enzyme are not.
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST
12. Cells in suspension are exposed to the test chemical, both with and without an exogenous source
of metabolic activation (see paragraph 19), for a suitable period of time (see paragraph 33), and then sub-
cultured to determine cytotoxicity and to allow phenotypic expression prior to mutant selection.
Cytotoxicity is determined by relative total growth (RTG—see paragraph 25) for the MLA and by relative
survival (RS—see paragraph 26) for TK6. The treated cultures are maintained in growth medium for a
sufficient period of time, characteristic of each cell type (see paragraph 37), to allow near-optimal
phenotypic expression of induced mutations. Following phenotypic expression, mutant frequency is
determined by seeding known numbers of cells in medium containing the selective agent to detect mutant
colonies, and in medium without selective agent to determine the cloning efficiency (viability). After a
suitable incubation time, colonies are counted. Mutant frequency is calculated based on the number of
mutant colonies corrected by the cloning efficiency at the time of mutant selection.
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD
Preparations
Cells
13. For MLA: Because the MLA was developed and characterized using the TK+/- -3.7.2C subline of
L5178Y cells, this specific subline has to be be used for the MLA. The L5178Y cell line was derived from
a methylcholanthrene-induced thymic lymphoma from a DBA-2 mouse (26). Clive and co-workers treated
L5178Y cells (designated by Clive as TK+/+ -3) with ethylmethane sulfonate and isolated a TK-/-
(designated as TK-/- -3.7) clone using bromodeoxyuridine as the selective agent. From the TK-/- clone a
spontaneous TK+/- clone (designated as TK+/- -3.7.2.) and a subclone (designated as TK+/--3.7.2C) were
isolated and characterized for use in the MLA (27). The karyotype for the cell line has been published (28)
(29) (30) (31). The modal chromosome number is 40. There is one metacentric chromosome (t12;13) that
should be counted as one chromosome. The mouse TK locus is located on the distal end of chromosome
11. The L5178Y TK+/- -3.7.2C cell line has mutations in both p53 alleles and produces mutant-p53 protein
(32) (33). The p53 status of the TK+/--3.7.2C cell line is likely responsible for the ability of the test to detect
large-scale damage (17).
14. For TK6: The TK6 is a human lymphoblastoid cell line. The parent cell line is an Epstein-Barr
virus-transformed cell line, WI-L2, which was originally derived from a 5-year-old male with hereditary
spherocytosis. The first isolated clone, HH4, was mutagenized with ICR191 and a TK heterozygous cell
line, TK6, was generated (34). TK6 cells are nearly diploid and the representative karyotype is 47, XY,
13+, t(14; 20), t(3; 21) (35). The human TK locus is located on the long arm of chromosome 17. The TK6
is a p53-competent cell line, because it has a wild-type p53 sequence in both alleles and expresses only
wild-type p53 protein (36).
15. For both the MLA and the TK6, when first establishing or replenishing a master stock, it is
advisable for the testing laboratory to assure the absence of Mycoplasma contamination, karyotype the
cells or paint the chromosomes harboring the TK locus, and to check population doubling times. The
normal cell cycle time for the cells used in the testing laboratory should be established and should be
consistent with published cell characteristics (16) (19) (37). This master stock should be stored at -150o C
or below and used to prepare all working cell stocks.

-- 3 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
4
© OECD, (2016)
16. Either prior to establishing a large number of cryopreserved working stocks or just prior to use in
an experiment, the culture may need to be cleansed of pre-existing mutant cells [unless the solvent control
mutant frequency (MF) is already within the acceptable range—see Table 2 for the MLA)]. This is
accomplished using methotrexate (aminopterin) to select against TK-deficient cells and adding thymidine,
hypoxanthine and glycine (L5178Y) or 2’-deoxycytidine (TK6) to the culture to ensure optimal growth of
the TK-competent cells (19) (38) (39), and (40) for TK6). General advice on good practice for the
maintenance of cell cultures as well as specific advice for L5178Y and TK6 cells can be found in (19) (31)
(37) (39) (41). For laboratories requiring master cell stocks to initiate either the MLA or TK6 or to obtain
new master cell stocks, a cell repository of well characterized cells is available (37).
Media and culture conditions
17. For both tests, appropriate culture medium and incubation conditions (e.g. culture vessels,
humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2, incubation temperature of 37oC) should be used for maintaining
cultures. Cell cultures should always be maintained under conditions that ensure that they are growing in
log phase. It is particularly important to choose media and culture conditions that ensure optimal growth of
cells during the expression period and cloning for both mutant and non-mutant cells. For the MLA and the
TK6, it is also important that the culture conditions ensure optimal growth of both the large colony/early
appearing and the small colony/late appearing TK mutants. More culture details, including the need to
properly heat inactivate horse serum if RPMI medium is used during mutant selection can be found in (19)
(31) (38) (39) (40) (42).
Preparation of cultures
18. Cells are propagated from stock cultures, seeded in culture medium at a density such that the
suspension cultures will continue to grow exponentially through the treatment and expression periods.
Metabolic activation
19. Exogenous metabolizing systems should be used when employing L5178Y and TK6 cells
because they have inadequate endogenous metabolic capacity. The most commonly used system that is
recommended by default unless otherwise justified, is a co-factor-supplemented post-mitochondrial
fraction (S9) prepared from the livers of rodents (generally rats) treated with enzyme-inducing agents such
as Aroclor 1254 (43) (44) (45) or a combination of phenobarbital and β-naphthoflavone (46) (47) (48) (49)
(50) (51). The latter combination does not conflict with the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
Pollutants (52) and has been shown to be as effective as Aroclor 1254 for inducing mixed-function
oxidases (45) (46) (47) (48) (49). The S9 fraction typically is used at concentrations ranging from 1-2% but
may be increased to 10% (v/v) in the final test medium. The choice of type and concentration of exogenous
metabolic activation system or metabolic inducer employed may be influenced by the class of test
chemicals.
Test chemical preparations
20. Solid test chemicals should be prepared in appropriate solvents and diluted, if appropriate, prior
to treatment of the cells (see paragraph 21). Liquid test chemicals may be added directly to the test system
and/or diluted prior to treatment of the test system. Gaseous or volatile test chemicals should be tested by
appropriate modifications to the standard protocols, such as treatment in sealed culture vessels (53) (54)
(55). Preparations of the test chemical should be made just prior to treatment unless stability data
demonstrate the acceptability of storage.

-- 4 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
5
© OECD, (2016)
Test Conditions
Solvents
21. The solvent should be chosen to optimize the solubility of the test chemical without adversely
impacting the conduct of the test, e.g. changing cell growth, affecting the integrity of the test chemical,
reacting with culture vessels, impairing the metabolic activation system. It is recommended that, wherever
possible, the use of an aqueous solvent (or culture medium) should be considered first. Well established
solvents are water or dimethyl sulfoxide. Generally organic solvents should not exceed 1% (v/v) and
aqueous solvents (saline or water) should not exceed 10% (v/v) in the final treatment medium. If other than
well-established solvents are used (e.g. ethanol or acetone), their use should be supported by data
indicating their compatibility with the test chemicals, the test system and their lack of genetic toxicity at
the concentration used. In the absence of that supporting data, it is important to add untreated controls (see
Annex 1, Definitions) to demonstrate that no deleterious or mutagenic effects are induced by the chosen
solvent.
Measuring cytotoxicity and choosing treatment concentrations
22. When determining the highest test chemical concentration, concentrations that have the capability
of producing artifactual positive responses, such as those producing excessive cytotoxicity (see paragraph
28), precipitation (see paragraph 29) in the culture medium, or marked changes in pH or osmolality (see
paragraph 8), should be avoided. If the test chemical causes a marked change in the pH of the medium at
the time of addition, the pH might be adjusted by buffering the final treatment medium so as to avoid
artifactual positive results and to maintain appropriate culture conditions.
23. Concentration selection is based on cytotoxicity and other considerations (see paragraphs 27-30).
While the evaluation of cytotoxicity in an initial test may be useful to better define the concentrations to be
used in the main experiment, an initial test is not required. Even if an initial cytotoxicity evaluation is
performed, the measurement of cytotoxicity for each culture is still required in the main experiment. If a
range finding experiment is conducted, it should cover a wide range of concentrations and can either be
terminated at day 1 after treatment or carried through the 2 day expression and to mutant selection (should
it appear that the concentrations used are appropriate).
24. Cytotoxicity should be determined for each individual test culture and control culture: methods
for MLA (2) and the TK6 (15) are defined by internationally agreed practice.
25. For both the agar and microwell versions of the MLA: Cytotoxicity should be evaluated using
relative total growth (RTG) which was originally defined by Clive and Spector in 1975 (2). This measure
includes the relative suspension growth (RSG: test culture vs. solvent control) during the cell treatment, the
expression time and the relative cloning efficiency (RCE: test culture vs. solvent control) at the time that
mutants are selected (2). It should be noted that the RSG includes any cell loss occurring in the test culture
during treatment (See Annex 2 for formulae).
26. For TK6: Cytotoxicity should be evaluated using relative survival (RS) i.e. cloning efficiency of
cells plated immediately after treatment, adjusted for any cell loss during treatment, based on cell count as
compared to the negative control (assigned a survival of 100%) (See Annex 2 for the formula).
27. At least four test concentrations (not including the solvent and positive controls) that meet the
acceptability criteria (appropriate cytotoxicity, number of cells, etc) should be evaluated. While the use of
duplicate cultures is advisable, either replicate or single treated cultures may be used at each concentration
tested. The results obtained for replicate cultures at a given concentration should be reported separately but

-- 5 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
6
© OECD, (2016)
can be pooled for the data analysis (55). For test chemicals demonstrating little or no cytotoxicity,
concentration intervals of approximately 2 to 3 fold will usually be appropriate. Where cytotoxicity occurs,
concentrations should be selected to cover the cytotoxicity range from that producing cytotoxicity as
described in paragraph 28 and including concentrations at which there is moderate and little or no
cytotoxicity. Many test chemicals exhibit steep concentration response curves and in order to cover the
whole range of cytotoxicity or to study the concentration response in detail, it may be necessary to use
more closely spaced concentrations and more than four concentrations, in particular in situations where a
repeat experiment is required (see paragraph 70). The use of more than 4 concentrations may be
particularly important when using single cultures.
28. If the maximum concentration is based on cytotoxicity, the highest concentration should aim to
achieve between 20 and 10% RTG for the MLA, and between 20 and 10% RS for the TK6 (paragraph 67).
29. For poorly soluble test chemicals that are not cytotoxic at concentrations below the lowest
insoluble concentration, the highest concentration analysed should produce turbidity or a precipitate visible
by eye or with the aid of an inverted microscope at the end of the treatment with the test chemical. Even if
cytotoxicity occurs above the lowest insoluble concentration, it is advisable to test at only one
concentration producing turbidity or with a visible precipitate because artifactual effects may result from
the precipitate. Because the MLA and TK6use suspension cultures, particular care should be taken to
assure that the precipitate does not interfere with the conduct of the test. The determination of solubility in
the culture medium prior to the experiment may also be useful.
30. If no precipitate or limiting cytotoxicity is observed, the highest test concentration should
correspond to 10 mM, 2 mg/mL or 2 μl/mL, whichever is the lowest (57) (58). When the test chemical is
not of defined composition e.g. substance of unknown or variable composition, complex reaction products
or biological materials [i.e. Chemical Substances of unknown or Variable Composition (UVCBs)],
environmental extracts etc., the top concentration, may need to be higher (e.g. 5 mg/mL), in the absence of
sufficient cytotoxicity, to increase the concentration of each of the components. It should be noted however
that these requirements may differ for human pharmaceuticals (59).
Controls
31. Concurrent negative controls (see paragraph 21), consisting of the solvent alone in the treatment
medium and handled in the same way as the treatment cultures, should be included for every experimental
condition.
32. Concurrent positive controls are needed to demonstrate the ability of the laboratory to identify
mutagens under the conditions of the test protocol used, the effectiveness of the exogenous metabolic
activation system (when applicable), and to demonstrate adequate detection of both small/late appearing
and large/early appearing TK mutants. Examples of positive controls are given in the table 1 below.
Alternative positive control substances can be used, if justified. Because in vitro mammalian cell tests for
genetic toxicity are sufficiently standardized for short-term treatments (3-4 hours) done concurrently with
and without metabolic activation using the same treatment duration, the use of positive controls may be
confined to a mutagen requiring metabolic activation. In this case, this single positive control response
will demonstrate both the activity of the metabolic activation system and the responsiveness of the test
system. If used, long term treatment (i.e. 24 hours without S9) should however have its own positive
control, as the treatment duration will differ from the test using metabolic activation. Each positive control
should be used at one or more concentrations expected to give reproducible and detectable increases over
background in order to demonstrate the sensitivity of the test system, and the response should not be
compromised by cytotoxicity exceeding the limits specified in this TG (see paragraph 28).

-- 6 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
7
© OECD, (2016)
Table 1: Reference substances recommended for assessing laboratory proficiency and for selection of
positive controls
Category Substance CASRN
1. Mutagens active without metabolic activation
Methyl methanesulphonate 66-27-3
Mitomycin C 50-07-7
4-Nitroquinoline-N-Oxide 56-57-5
2. Mutagens requiring metabolic activation
Benzo(a)pyrene 50-32-8
Cyclophosphamide
(monohydrate)
50-18-0
(6055-19-2)
7,12-Dimethylbenzanthracene 57-97-6
3-Methylcholanthrene 56-49-5
PROCEDURE
Treatment with test chemical
33. Proliferating cells are treated with the test chemical in the presence and absence of a metabolic
activation system. Exposure should be for a suitable period of time (usually 3 to 4 hours is adequate). It
should be noted however that these requirements may differ for human pharmaceuticals (59). For MLA, in
cases where the short-term treatment yields negative results, and there is information suggesting the need
for longer treatment [e.g. nucleoside analogs, poorly soluble substances, (5) (59)], consideration should be
given to conducting the test with longer treatment, i.e. 24 hours without S9.
34. The minimum number of cells used for each test (control and treated) culture at each stage in the
test should be based on the spontaneous mutant frequency. A general guide is to treat and passage sufficient
cells in each experimental culture so as to maintain at least 10 but ideally 100 spontaneous mutants in all
phases of the test (treatment, phenotypic expression and mutant selection) (56).
35. For MLA the recommended acceptable spontaneous mutant frequency is between 35-140 x 10-6
(agar version) and 50-170 x 10-6 (microwell version) (see Table 2). To have at least 10 and ideally 100
spontaneous mutants surviving treatment for each test culture, it is necessary to treat at least 6 x 106 cells.
Treating this number of cells, and maintaining sufficient cells during expression and cloning for mutant
selection, provides for a sufficient number of spontaneous mutants (10 or more) during all phases of the
experiment, even for the cultures treated at concentrations that result in 90% cytotoxicity (as measured by
an RTG of 10%) (19) (38) (39).
36. For the TK6, the spontaneous mutant frequency is generally between 2 and 10 x 10-6. To have at
least 10 spontaneous mutants surviving treatment for each culture, it is necessary to treat at least 20 x 106
cells. Treating this number of cells provides for a sufficient number of spontaneous mutants (10 or more)
even for the cultures treated at concentrations that cause 90% cytotoxicity during treatment (10% RS). In
addition a sufficient number of cells must be cultured during the expression period and plated for mutant
selection (60).

-- 7 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
8
© OECD, (2016)
Phenotypic expression time and measurement of cytotoxicity and mutant frequency
37. At the end of the treatment period, cells are cultured for a defined time to allow near optimal
phenotypic expression of newly induced mutants; specific to each cell line. For the MLA, the phenotypic
expression period is 2 days. For the TK6, the phenotypic expression period is 3-4 days. If a 24 hr
treatment is used, the expression period begins after the end of treatment.
38. During the phenotypic expression period, cells are enumerated on a daily basis. For the MLA the
daily cell counts are used to calculate the daily suspension growth (SG). Following the 2 day expression
period, cells are suspended in medium with and without selective agent for the determination of the
numbers of mutants (selection plates) and for cloning efficiency (viability plates), respectively. For MLA
there are two equally acceptable methods for mutant selection cloning; one using soft agar and the other
using liquid medium in 96-well plates (19) (38) (39). Cloning in the TK6 is conducted using liquid media
and 96-well plates (16).
39. Triflurothymidine (TFT) is the only recommended selective agent for TK mutants (61).
40. For the MLA, agar plates and microwell plates are counted after 10-12 days incubation. For the
TK6, colonies in microwell plates are scored after 10-14 days for the early appearing mutants. In order to
recover the slow growing (late appearing) TK6 mutants, it is necessary to re-feed the cells with growth
medium and TFT after counting the early appearing mutants and then to incubate the plates for an
additional 7-10 days (62). See paragraphs 42 & 44 for a discussion concerning the enumeration of the slow
and normal growth TK mutants.
41. The appropriate calculations for the two tests including the two methods (agar and microwell) for
the MLA are in Annex 2. For the agar method of the MLA, colonies are counted and the number of mutant
colonies adjusted by the cloning efficiency to calculate a MF. For the microwell version of the MLA and
the TK6, cloning efficiency both for the selection and cloning efficiency plates is determined according to
the Poisson distribution (63). The MF is calculated from these two cloning efficiencies.
Mutant Colony characterization
42. For the MLA, if the test chemical is positive (see paragraphs 62-63), colony characterization by
colony sizing or growth should be performed on at least one of the test cultures (generally the highest
acceptable positive concentration) and on the negative and positive controls. If the test chemical is negative
(see paragraph 64), mutant colony characterization should be performed on the negative and positive
controls. For the microwell method of the MLA, small colony mutants are defined as those covering less
than 25% of the well’s diameter and large colony mutants as those that cover more than 25% of the well’s
diameter. For the agar method, an automatic colony counter is used to enumerate the mutant colonies and
for colony sizing. Approaches to colony sizing are detailed in the literature (19) (38) (40). Colony
characterization on the negative and positive control is needed to demonstrate that the studies are
adequately conducted.
43. The test chemical cannot be determined to be negative if the both the large and small colony
mutants are not adequately detected in the positive control. Colony characterization can be used to provide
general information concerning the ability of the test chemical to cause point mutations and/or
chromosomal events (paragraph 4).
44. TK6: Normal growing and slow growing mutants are differentiated by a difference in incubation
time (see paragraph 40). For the TK6 generally both the early and late appearing mutants are scored for all
of the cultures including the negative and positive controls. Colony characterization of the negative and

-- 8 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
9
© OECD, (2016)
positive control is needed to demonstrate that the studies are adequately conducted. The test chemical
cannot be determined to be negative if both the early appearing and late appearing mutants are not
adequately detected in the positive control. Colony characterization can be used to provide general
information concerning the ability of the test chemical to cause point mutations and/or chromosomal
events (paragraph 4).
Proficiency of the laboratory
45. In order to demonstrate sufficient experience with the test prior to using it for routine testing, the
laboratory should have performed a series of experiments with reference positive substances acting via
different mechanisms (at least one active with and one active without metabolic activation selected from
the substances listed in Table 1) and various negative controls (including untreated cultures and various
solvents/vehicles). These positive and negative control responses should be consistent with the literature.
This requirement is not applicable to laboratories that have experience, i.e. that have an historical data base
available as defined in paragraphs 47-50. For the MLA the values obtained for both positive and negative
controls should be consistent with the IWGT recommendations (see Table 2).
46. A selection of positive control substances (see Table 1) should be investigated with short and long
treatments (if using long treatments) in the absence of metabolic activation, and also with short treatment
in the presence of metabolic activation, in order to demonstrate proficiency to detect mutagenic substances,
to determine the effectiveness of the metabolic activation system and to demonstrate the appropriateness of
the cell growth conditions during treatment, phenotypic expression and mutant selection and of the scoring
procedures. A range of concentrations of the selected substances should be chosen so as to give
reproducible and concentration-related increases above the background in order to demonstrate the
sensitivity and dynamic range of the test system.
Historical control data
47. The laboratory should establish:
- A historical positive control range and distribution,
- A historical negative (untreated, solvent) control range and distribution.
48. When first acquiring data for an historical negative control distribution, concurrent negative
controls should be consistent with published negative control data. As more experimental data are added to
the control distribution, concurrent negative controls should ideally be within the 95% control limits of that
distribution (64) (65).
49. The laboratory’s historical negative control database should initially be built with a minimum of
10 experiments but would preferably consist of at least 20 experiments conducted under comparable
experimental conditions. Laboratories should use quality control methods, such as control charts (e.g. C-
charts or X-bar charts (65), to identify how variable their positive and negative control data are, and to
show that the methodology is 'under control' in their laboratory (66). Further details and recommendations
on how to build and use the historical data can be found in the literature (64).
50. Negative control data should consist of mutant frequencies from single or preferably replicate
cultures as described in paragraph 27. Concurrent negative controls should ideally be within the 95%
control limits of the distribution of the laboratory’s historical negative control database. Where negative
control data fall outside the 95% control limit they may be acceptable for inclusion in the historical control
distribution as long as these data are not extreme outliers, there is evidence that the test system is ‘under
control’ (see paragraph 49) and there is evidence of no technical or human failure.

-- 9 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
10
© OECD, (2016)
51. Any changes to the experimental protocol should be considered in terms of the consistency of the
data with the laboratory’s existing historical control databases. Any major inconsistencies should result in
the establishment of a new historical control database.
DATA AND REPORTING
Presentation of the results
52. The presentation of data for both the MLA and TK6 should include, for both treated and control
cultures, data required for the calculation of cytotoxicity (RTG or RS, respectively) and mutant
frequencies, as described below.
53. For MLA, individual culture data should be provided for RSG, RTG, the cloning efficiency at the
time of mutant selection and the number of mutant colonies (for agar version) or number of empty wells
(for microwell version). MF should be expressed as number of mutant cells per million surviving cells. If
the response is positive, small and large colony MFs (and/or percentage of the total MF) should be given
for at least one concentration of the test chemical (generally the highest positive concentration) and the
negative and positive controls. In the case of a negative response, the small and large colony MF should be
given for the negative control and the positive control.
54. For TK6, individual culture data should be provided for RS, the cloning efficiency at the time of
mutant selection and the number of empty wells for early appearing and late appearing mutants. MF should
be expressed as number of mutant cells per number of surviving cells, and should include the total MF as
well as the MF (and/or percentage of the total MF) of the early and late appearing mutants.
Acceptability Criteria
55. For both the MLA and the TK6 the following criteria should be met before determining the
overall results for a specific test chemical:
- Two experimental conditions (short treatment with and without metabolic activation - see
paragraph 33) were conducted unless one resulted in positive results.
- Adequate number of cells and concentrations should be analysable (see paragraphs 27, 34-36).
- The criteria for the selection of top concentration are consistent with those described in
paragraphs 28-30.
Acceptability criteria for negative and positive controls
56. The IWGT Expert MLA Workgroup analysis of an extensive amount of MLA data resulted in
international consensus for specific acceptability criteria for the MLA (1) (2) (3) (4) (5). Therefore, this
Test Guideline provides specific recommendations for determining the acceptability of negative and
positive controls and for evaluating individual substance results in the MLA. The TK6 has a much smaller
database and has not undergone evaluation by a workgroup.
57. For MLA, every experiment should be evaluated as to whether the untreated/solvent control
meets the IWGT MLA Workgroup acceptance criteria ((4) and Table 2, below) for the: (1) MF (note that
the IWGT acceptable MFs are different for the agar and microwell versions of the MLA), (2) cloning
efficiency (CE) at the time of mutant selection and (3) suspension growth (SG) for the solvent control (see
Annex 2 for formulae).

-- 10 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
11
© OECD, (2016)
Table 2: Acceptability criteria for the MLA
Parameter Soft Agar Method Microwell Method
Mutant Frequency 35 – 140 X 10-6 50 – 170 X 10-6
Cloning Efficiency 65 – 120% 65 – 120%
Suspension Growth 8 – 32 fold (3-4 hour
treatment)
32 – 180 fold (24 hour
treatment, if conducted)
8 – 32 fold (3-4 hour
treatment)
32 – 180 fold (24 hour
treatment, if conducted)
58. For MLA, every test should also be evaluated as to whether the positive control(s) meets at least
one of the following two acceptance criteria developed by the IWGT workgroup:
(1) The positive control should demonstrate an absolute increase in total MF, that is, an increase
above the spontaneous background MF [an induced MF (IMF)] of at least 300 X 10-6. At least
40% of the IMF should be reflected in the small colony MF.
(2) The positive control has an increase in the small colony MF of at least 150 X 10-6 above that
seen in the concurrent untreated/solvent control (a small colony IMF of 150 X 10-6).
59. For the TK6, a test will be acceptable if the concurrent negative control is considered acceptable
for addition to the laboratory historical negative control database as described in paragraphs 48-49. In
addition, the concurrent positive controls (see paragraph 32) should induce responses that are compatible
with those generated in the historical positive control data base and produce a statistically significant
increase compared with the concurrent negative control.
60. For both tests, the upper limit of cytotoxicity observed in the positive control culture should be
the same as of the experimental cultures. That is, the RTG/RS should not be less than 10%. It is sufficient
to use a single concentration (or one of the concentrations of the positive control cultures if more than one
concentration is used) to demonstrate that the acceptance criteria for the positive control have been
satisfied. Further, the MF of the positive control must be within the acceptable range established for the
laboratory.
Evaluation and interpretation of results
61. For the MLA, significant work on biological relevance and criteria for a positive response has
been conducted by The Mouse Lymphoma Expert Workgroup of the IWGT (4). Therefore, this test
guideline provides specific recommendations for the interpretation of test chemical results from the MLA
(see paragraphs 62-64). The TK6 has a much smaller database and has not undergone evaluation by a
workgroup. Therefore, the recommendations for the interpretation of data for the TK6 are given in more
general terms (see paragraphs 65-66). Additional recommendations apply to both tests (see paragraphs 67-
71).
MLA
62. An approach for defining positive and negative responses is recommended to assure that the
increased MF is biologically relevant. In place of statistical analysis generally used for other tests, it relies
on the use of a predefined induced mutant frequency (i.e. increase in MF above concurrent control),
designated the Global Evaluation Factor (GEF), which is based on the analysis of the distribution of the
negative control MF data from participating laboratories (4). For the agar version of the MLA the GEF is
90 x 10-6 and for the microwell version of the MLA the GEF is 126 x 10-6.

-- 11 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
12
© OECD, (2016)
63. Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered to be clearly
positive if, in any of the experimental conditions examined (see paragraph 33), the increase in MF above
the concurrent background exceeds the GEF and the increase is concentration related (e.g. using a trend
test). The test chemical is then considered able to induce mutation in this test system.
64. Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered to be clearly
negative if, in all experimental conditions examined (see paragraph 33) there is no concentration related
response or, if there is an increase in MF, it does not exceed the GEF. The test chemical is then considered
unable to induce mutations in this test system.
TK6
65. Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered to be clearly
positive if, in any of the experimental conditions examined (see paragraph 33):
a) at least one of the test concentrations exhibits a statistically significant increase compared with
the concurrent negative control
b) the increase is concentration-related when evaluated with an appropriate trend test (see
paragraph 33)
c) any of the results are outside the distribution of the historical negative control data (e.g. Poisson-
based 95% control limit; see paragraph 48).
When all of these criteria are met, the test chemical is then considered able to induce mutation in
this test system. Recommendations for the most appropriate statistical methods can be found in
the literature (66) (67).
66. Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered clearly negative
if, in all experimental conditions examined (see paragraph 33):
a) none of the test concentrations exhibits a statistically significant increase compared with the
concurrent negative control,
b) there is no concentration-related increase when evaluated with an appropriate trend test
c) all results are inside the distribution of the historical negative control data (e.g. Poisson-based
95% control limit; see paragraph 48).
The test chemical is then considered unable to induce mutations in this test system.
For both the MLA and TK6:
67. If the maximum concentration is based on cytotoxicity, the highest concentration should aim to
achieve between 20 and 10% RTG/RS. The consensus is that care should be taken when interpreting
positive results only found between 20 and 10% RTG/RS and a result would not be considered positive if
the increase in MF occurred only at or below 10% RTG/RS (if evaluated) (2) (59).
68. There are some circumstances under which additional information may assist in determining that
a test chemical is not mutagenic when there is no culture showing an RTG value between 10-20 %
RTG/RS. These situations are outlined as follows: (1) There is no evidence of mutagenicity (e.g. no dose
response, no mutant frequencies above those seen in the concurrent negative control or historical
background ranges, etc.) in a series of data points within 100% to 20% RTG/RS and there is at least one
data point between 20 and 25% RTG/RS. (2) There is no evidence of mutagenicity (e.g. no dose response,

-- 12 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
13
© OECD, (2016)
no mutant frequencies above those seen in the concurrent negative control or historical background ranges,
etc.) in a series of data points between 100% to 25% RTG/RS and there is also a negative data point
slightly below 10% RTG/RS. In both of these situations the test chemical can be concluded to be negative.
69. There is no requirement for verification of a clearly positive or negative response.
70. In cases when the response is neither clearly negative nor clearly positive as described above
and/or in order to assist in establishing the biological relevance of a result the data should be evaluated by
expert judgement and/or further investigations. Performing a repeat experiment possibly using modified
experimental conditions [e.g. concentration spacing to increase the probability of attaining data points
within the 10-20% RTG/RS range, using other metabolic activation conditions (i.e. S9 concentration or S9
origin) and duration of treatment] could be useful.
71. In rare cases, even after further investigations, the data set will preclude making a conclusion of
positive or negative results. Therefore the test chemical response should be concluded to be equivocal
(interpreted as equally likely to be positive or negative).
Test Report
72. The test report should include the following information:
Test chemical:
- source, lot number, limit date for use, if available;
- stability of the test chemical itself, if known;
- solubility and stability of the test chemical in solvent, if known;
- measurement of pH, osmolality, and precipitate in the culture medium to which the test chemical
was added, as appropriate.
Mono-constituent substance:
- physical appearance, water solubility, and additional relevant physicochemical properties;
- chemical identification, such as IUPAC or CAS name, CAS number, SMILES or InChI code,
structural formula, purity, chemical identity of impurities as appropriate and practically feasible,
etc.
- Multi-constituent substance, UVBCs and mixtures:
- characterized as far as possible by chemical identity (see above), quantitative occurrence and
relevant physicochemical properties of the constituents.
Solvent:
 justification for choice of solvent;
 percentage of solvent in the final culture medium.
Cells:
For Laboratory master cultures:
 type and source of cells, and history in the testing laboratory;
 karyotype features and/or modal number of chromosomes;
 methods for maintenance of cell cultures;
 absence of mycoplasma;
 cell doubling times.
Test conditions:
 rationale for selection of concentrations and number of cell cultures; including e.g. cytotoxicity
data and solubility limitations;

-- 13 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
14
© OECD, (2016)
 composition of media, CO2 concentration, humidity level;
 concentration of test chemical expressed as final concentration in the culture medium (e.g. μg or
mg/mL or mM of culture medium);
 concentration (and/or volume) of solvent and test chemical added in the culture medium;
 incubation temperature;
 incubation time;
 duration of treatment;
 cell density during treatment;
 type and composition of metabolic activation system (source of S9, method of preparation of the
S9 mix, the concentration or volume of S9 mix and S9 in the final culture medium, quality
controls of S9);
 positive and negative control substances, final concentrations for each conditions of treatment;
 length of expression period (including number of cells seeded, and subcultures and feeding
schedules, if appropriate);
 identity of the selective agent and its concentration;
 for the MLA, the version used (agar or microwell) should be indicated
 criteria for acceptability of the tests;
 methods used to enumerate numbers of viable and mutant cells;
 methods used for the measurements of cytotoxicity;
 any supplementary information relevant to cytotoxicity and method used;
 duration of incubation times after plating;
 definition of colonies of which size and type are considered (including criteria for "small' and
"large" colonies, as appropriate);
 criteria for considering studies as positive, negative or equivocal;
 methods used to determine pH, osmolality, if performed and precipitation if relevant.
Results:
 number of cells treated and number of cells sub-cultured for each culture;
 toxicity parameters (RTG for MLA and RS for TK6);
 signs of precipitation and time of the determination;
 number of cells plated in selective and non-selective medium;
 number of colonies in non-selective medium and number of resistant colonies in selective
medium and related mutant frequencies;
 colony sizing for the negative and positive controls and if the test chemical is positive, at least
one concentration, and related mutant frequencies;
 concentration-response relationship, where possible;
 concurrent negative (solvent) and positive control data (concentrations and solvents);
 historical negative (solvent) and positive control data (concentrations and solvents) with ranges,
means and standard deviations; number of tests upon which the historical controls are based;
 statistical analyses (for individual cultures and pooled replicates if appropriate), and p-values if
any; and for the MLA, the GEF evaluation.
Discussion of the results.
Conclusion..

-- 14 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
15
© OECD, (2016)
LITERATURE
1) Moore, M.M., Honma, M. Clements, J. (Rapporteur), Awogi, T., Bolcsfoldi, G., Cole, J.,
Gollapudi, B., Harrington-Brock, K., Mitchell, A., Muster, W., Myhr, B., O'Donovan, M.,
Ouldelhkim, M-C., San, R., Shimada, H. and Stankowski, L.F. Jr. (2000). Mouse Lymphoma
Thymidine Kinase Locus (TK) Gene Mutation Assay: International Workshop on Genotoxicity
Test Procedures (IWGTP) Workgroup Report, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 35 (3): 185-190.
2) Moore, M.M., Honma, M., Clements, J., Harrington-Brock, K., Awogi, T., Bolcsfoldi, G., Cifone,
M., Collard, D., Fellows, M., Flanders, K., Gollapudi, B., Jenkinson, P., Kirby, P., Kirchner, S.,
Kraycer, J., McEnaney, S., Muster, W., Myhr, B., O’Donovan, M., Oliver, Ouldelhkim, M-C.,
Pant, K., Preston, R., Riach, C., San, R., Shimada, H. and Stankowski, L.F. Jr. (2002). Mouse
Lymphoma Thymidine Kinase Locus Gene Mutation Assay: Follow-Up International Workshop
on Genotoxicity Test Procedures, New Orleans, Louisiana, (April 2000), Environ. Mol.
Mutagen., 40 (4): 292-299.
3) Moore, M.M., Honma, M., Clements, J., Bolcsfoldi, G., Cifone, M., Delongchamp, R., Fellows,
M., Gollapudi, B., Jenkinson, P., Kirby, P., Kirchner, S., Muster, W., Myhr, B., O’Donovan, M.,
Ouldelhkim, M-C., Pant, K., Preston, R., Riach, C., San, R., Stankowski, L.F. Jr., Thakur, A.,
Wakuri, S. and Yoshimura, I. (2003), Mouse Lymphoma Thymidine Kinase Locus Gene Mutation
Assay: International Workshop (Plymouth, UK) on Genotoxicity Test Procedures Workgroup
Report, Mutation Res., 540:127-140.
4) Moore, M.M., Honma, M., Clements, J., Bolcsfoldi, G., Burlinson, B., Cifone, M., Clarke, J.,
Delongchamp, R., Durward, R., Fellows, M., Gollapudi, B., Hou, S., Jenkinson, P., Lloyd, M.,
Majeska, J., Myhr, B., O’Donovan, M., Omori, T., Riach, C., San, R., Stankowski, L.F. Jr.,
Thakur, A.K., Van Goethem, F., Wakuri, S. and Yoshimura, I. (2006). Mouse Lymphoma
Thymidine Kinase Gene Mutation Assay: Follow-Up Meeting of the International Workshop on
Genotoxicity Tests – Aberdeen, Scotland, 2003 – Assay Acceptance Criteria, Positive Controls,
and Data Evaluation, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 47 (1):1-5.
5) Moore, M.M., Honma, M., Clements, J., Bolcsfoldi, G., Burlinson, B., Cifone, M., Clarke, J.,
Clay, P., Doppalapudi, R., Fellows, M., Gollapudi, B., Hou, S., Jenkinson, P., Muster, W., Pant,
K., Kidd, D.A., Lorge, E., Lloyd, M., Myhr, B., O’Donovan, M., Riach, C., Stankowski, L.F. Jr.,
Thakur A.K. and Van Goethem, F. (2007). Mouse Lymphoma Thymidine Kinase Mutation Assay:
Meeting of the International Workshop on Genotoxicity Testing, San Francisco, 2005,
Recommendations for 24-h Treatment, Mutation. Res., 627 (1): 36-40.
6) OECD (2016). Overview of the set of OECD Genetic Toxicology Test Guidelines and updates
performed in 2014-2015. ENV Publications. Series on Testing and Assessment, No. 234, OECD,
Paris.
7) Fellows M.D., Luker, T., Cooper, A. and O'Donovan, M.R. (2012). Unusual Structure-
Genotoxicity Relationship in Mouse Lymphoma Cells Observed with a Series of Kinase
Inhibitors. Mutation, Res., 746 (1): 21-28.
8) Honma, M., Momose, M., Sakamoto, H., Sofuni, T. and Hayashi, M. (2001), Spindol Poisons
Induce Allelic Loss in Mouse Lymphoma Cells Through Mitotic Non-Disjunction. Mutation Res.,
493 (1-2): 101-114.

-- 15 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
16
© OECD, (2016)
9) Wang, J., Sawyer, J.R., Chen, L., Chen, T., Honma, M., Mei, N. and Moore, M.M. (2009). The
Mouse Lymphoma Assay Detects Recombination, Deletion, and Aneuploidy, Toxicol. Sci.., 109
(1): 96-105.
10) Applegate, M.L., Moore, M.M., Broder, C.B., Burrell, A., and Hozier, J.C. (1990), Molecular
Dissection of Mutations at the Heterozygous Thymidine Kinase Locus in Mouse Lymphoma
Cells. Proc. National. Academy. Sci. USA, 87 (1): 51-55.
11) Hozier, J., Sawyer, J., Moore, M., Howard, B. and Clive, D. (1981). Cytogenetic Analysis of the
L5178Y/TK+/- Leads to TK-/- Mouse Lymphoma Mutagenesis Assay System, Mutation Res., 84
(1): 169-181.
12) Hozier, J., Sawyer, J., Clive, D. and Moore, M.M. (1985), Chromosome 11 Aberrations in Small
Colony L5178Y TK-/- Mutants Early in their Clonal History, Mutation Res., 147 (5): 237-242.
13) Moore, M.M., Clive, D., Hozier, J.C., Howard, B.E., Batson, A.G., Turner, N.T. and Sawyer, J.
(1985). Analysis of Trifluorothymidine-Resistant (TFTr) Mutants of L5178Y/TK+/- Mouse
Lymphoma Cells. Mutation Res., 151 (1): 161-174.
14) Liber H.L., Call K.M. and Little J.B. (1987). Molecular and Biochemical Analyses of
Spontaneous and X-Ray-Induced Mutants in Human Lymphoblastoid Cells. Mutation Res., 178
(1): 143-153.
15) Li C.Y., Yandell D.W. and Little J.B. (1992). Molecular Mechanisms of Spontaneous and Induced
Loss of Heterozygosity in Human Cells In Vitro. Somat. Cell Mol. Genet., 18 (1): 77-87.
16) Honma M., Hayashi M. and Sofuni T. (1997). Cytotoxic and Mutagenic Responses to X-Rays
and Chemical Mutagens in Normal and P53-Mutated Human Lymphoblastoid Cells. Mutation.
Res., 374 (1): 89-98.
17) Honma, M., Momose, M., Tanabe, H., Sakamoto, H., Yu, Y., Little, J.B., Sofuni, T. and Hayashi,
M. (2000). Requirement of Wild-Type P53 Protein for Maintenance of Chromosomal Integrity.
Mol. Carcinogen., 28 (4): 203-14.
18) Amundson S.A. and Liber H.L. (1992). A Comparison of Induced Mutation at Homologous
Alleles of the TK Locus in Human Cells. II. Molecular Analysis of Mutants. Mutation Res., 267
(1): 89-95.
19) Schisler M.R., Moore M.M. and Gollapudi B.B. (2013). In Vitro Mouse Lymphoma (L5178Y
TK+/- -3.7.2C) Forward Mutation Assay. In Protocols in Genotoxicity Assessment A. Dhawan and
M. Bajpayee (Eds.), Springer Protocols, Humana Press. p. 27-50.
20) Long, L.H., Kirkland, D., Whitwell, J. and Halliwell, B. (2007), Different Cytotoxic and
Clastogenic Effects of Epigallocatechin Gallate in Various Cell-Culture Media Due to Variable
Rates of its Oxidation in the Culture Medium, Mutation Res., 634 (1-2): 177-183.
21) Nesslany, F., Simar-Meintieres, S., Watzinger, M., Talahari, I. and Marzin, D. (2008).
Characterization of the Genotoxicity of Nitrilotriacetic Acid. Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 49 (6):
439-452.
22) Brusick D. (1986). Genotoxic Effects in Cultured Mammalian Cells Produced by Low pH
Treatment Conditions and Increased Ion Concentrations. Environ. Mutagen., 8 (6): 879-886.

-- 16 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
17
© OECD, (2016)
23) Morita, T., Nagaki, T., Fukuda, I. and Okumura, K. (1992). Clastogenicity of Low pH to Various
Cultured Mammalian Cells. Mutation Res., 268 (2): 297-305.
24) Scott, D., Galloway, S.M., Marshall, R.R., Ishidate, M.Jr, Brusick, D., Ashby, J. and Myhr, B.C.
(1991). Genotoxicity Under Extreme Culture Conditions. A report from ICPEMC Task Group 9.
Mutation Res., 257: 147-204.
25) Wang J., Heflich R.H. and Moore M.M. (2007). A Method to Distinguish Between the De Novo
Induction of Thymidine Kinase Mutants and the Selection of Pre-Existing Thymidine Kinase
Mutants in the Mouse Lymphoma Assay. Mutation Res., 626 (1-2): 185-190.
26) Fischer, G.A. (1958). Studies on the Culture of Leukemic Cells In Vitro. Ann. N.Y. Academy Sci.,
76: 673-680.
27) Clive, D., Johnson, K.O., Spector, J.F.S., Batson, A.G. and Brown, M.M.M. (1979), Validation
and Characterization of the L5178Y/TK+/-- Mouse Lymphoma Mutagen Assay System. Mutation
Res., 59(1): 61-108.
28) Sawyer, J., Moore, M.M., Clive, D. and Hozier, J. (1985). Cytogenetic Characterization of the
L5178Y TK+/- 3.7.2C Mouse Lymphoma Cell Line, Mutation Res., 147 (5): 243-253.
29) Sawyer J.R., Moore M.M. and Hozier J.C. (1989). High-Resolution Cytogenetic Characterization
of the L5178Y TK+/- Mouse Lymphoma Cell Line, Mutation Res., 214 (2): 181-193.
30) Sawyer, J.R., Binz, R.L., Wang, J. and Moore, M.M. (2006). Multicolor Spectral Karyotyping of
the L5178Y TK+/--3.7.2C Mouse Lymphoma Cell Line, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 47 (2): 127-131.
31) Fellows, M.D., McDermott, A., Clare, K.R., Doherty, A. and Aardema, M.J. (2014), The Spectral
Karyotype of L5178Y TK+/- Mouse Lymphoma Cells Clone 3.7.2C and Factors Affecting Mutant
Frequency at the Thymidine Kinase (TK) Locus in the Microtitre Mouse Lymphoma Assay,
Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 55 (1): 35-42.
32) Storer, R.D., Jraynak, A.R., McKelvey, T.W., Elia, M.C., Goodrow, T.L. and DeLuca, J.G. (1997).
The Mouse Lymphoma L5178Y TK+/- Cell Line is Heterozygous for a Codon 170 Mutation in the
P53 Tumor Suppressor Gene. Mutation.. Res., 373 (2): 157-165.
33) Clark L.S., Harrington-Brock, K., Wang, J., Sargent, L., Lowry, D., Reynolds, S.H. and Moore,
M.M. (2004). Loss of P53 Heterozygosity is not Responsible for the Small Colony Thymidine
Kinase Mutant Phenotype in L5178Y Mouse Lymphoma Cells. Mutagen., 19 (4): 263-268.
34) Skopek T.R., Liber, H.L., Penman, B.W. and Thilly, W.G. (1978). Isolation of a Human
Lymphoblastoid Line Heterozygous at the Thymidine Kinase Locus: Possibility for a Rapid
Human Cell Mutation Assay. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 84 (2): 411–416.
35) Honma M. (2005). Generation of Loss of Heterozygosity and its Dependency on P53 Status in
Human Lymphoblastoid Cells. Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 45 (2-3): 162-176.
36) Xia, F., Wang, X., Wang, Y.H., Tsang, N.M., Yandell, D.W., Kelsey, K.T. and Liber, H.L. (1995).
Altered P53 Status Correlates with Differences in Sensitivity to Radiation-Induced Mutation and
Apoptosis in Two Closely Related Human Lymphoblast Lines. Cancer. Res., 55 (1): 12-15.

-- 17 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
18
© OECD, (2016)
37) Lorge, E., M. Moore, J. Clements, M. O Donovan, M. Honma, A. Kohara, J. van Benthem, S.
Galloway, M.J. Armstrong, V. Thybaud, B. Gollapudi, M. Aardema, J. Kim, A. Sutter, D.J.
Kirkland,(2015). Standardized Cell Sources and Recommendations for Good Cell Culture
Practices in Genotoxicity Testing. (Manuscript in preparation).
38) Lloyd M. and Kidd D. (2012). The Mouse Lymphoma Assay. Springer Protocols: Methods in
Molecular Biology 817, Genetic Toxicology Principles and Methods, ed. Parry and Parry,
Humana Press. ISBN, 978-1-61779-420-9, 35-54.
39) Mei N., Guo X. and Moore M.M. (2014). Methods for Using the Mouse Lymphoma Assay to
Screen for Chemical Mutagenicity and Photo-Mutagenicity. In: Optimization in Drug Discover:
In Vitro Methods: Yan Z and Caldwell(Eds) , 2nd Edition, GW; Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.
40) Liber H.L. and Thilly W.G. (1982). Mutation Assay at the Thymidine Kinase Locus in
Diploidhuman Lymphoblasts. Mutation Res., 94 (2): 467-485.
41) Coecke, S., Balls, M., Bowe, G., Davis, J., Gstraunthaler, G., Hartung, T., Hay, R., Merten, OW.,
Price, A., Schechtman, L., Stacey, G. and Stokes, W. (2005), Guidance on Good Cell Culture
Practice. A Report of the Second ECVAM Task Force on Good Cell Culture Practice. ATLA., 33
(3): 261-287.
42) Moore M.M. and Howard B.E. (1982). Quantitation of Small Colony Trifluorothymidine-
Resistant Mutants of L5178Y/TK+/- Mouse Lymphoma Cells in RPMI-1640 Medium, Mutation
Res., 104 (4-5): 287-294.
43) Ames B.N., McCann J. and Yamasaki E. (1975). Methods for Detecting Carcinogens and Mutagens
with the Salmonella/Mammalian Microsome Mutagenicity Test. Mutation Res., 31 (6): 347-364.
44) Maron D.M. and Ames B.N. (1983). Revised Methods for the Salmonella Mutagenicity Test.
Mutation Res., 113 (3-4): 173-215.
45) Natarajan, A.T., Tates, A.D, Van Buul, P.P.W., Meijers, M. and De Vogel, N. (1976). Cytogenetic
Effects of Mutagens/Carcinogens After Activation in a Microsomal System In Vitro, I. Induction of
Chromosomal Aberrations and Sister Chromatid Exchanges by Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) and
Dimethylnitrosamine (DMN) in CHO Cells in the Presence of Rat-Liver Microsomes. Mutation
Res., 37 (1): 83-90.
46) Matsuoka A., Hayashi M. and Ishidate M. Jr. (1979). Chromosomal Aberration Tests on 29
Chemicals Combined with S9 Mix In Vitro. Mutation Res., 66 (3): 277-290.
47) Ong T.M., et al. (1980). Differential Effects of Cytochrome P450-Inducers on Promutagen
Activation Capabilities and Enzymatic Activities of S-9 from Rat Liver, J. Environ. Pathol.
Toxicol., 4 (1): 55-65
48) Elliott, B.M., Combes, R.D., Elcombe, C.R., Gatehouse, D.G., Gibson, G.G., Mackay, J.M. and
Wolf, R.C. (1992). Report of UK Environmental Mutagen Society Working Party. Alternatives to
Aroclor 1254-Induced S9 in In Vitro Genotoxicity Assays. Mutagen., 7 (3): 175-177.
49) Matsushima, T., Sawamura, M., Hara, K. and Sugimura, T. (1976). A Safe Substitute for
Polychlorinated Biphenyls as an Inducer of Metabolic Activation Systems. In: ) In Vitro Metabolic
Activation in Mutagenesis Testing. de Serres F.J., et al. (Eds, Elsevier, North-Holland, pp. 85-88.

-- 18 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
19
© OECD, (2016)
50) Galloway S.M., et al. (1994). Report from Working Group on In Vitro Tests for Chromosomal
Aberrations. Mutation Res., 312 (3): 241-261.
51) Johnson T.E., Umbenhauer D.R. and Galloway S.M. (1996). Human Liver S-9 Metabolic
Activation: Proficiency in Cytogenetic Assays and Comparison with Phenobarbital/Beta-
Naphthoflavone or Aroclor 1254 Induced Rat S-9, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 28 (1): 51-59.
52) UNEP. (2001). Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP).
53) Krahn D.F., Barsky F.C. and McCooey K.T. (1982). CHO/HGPRT Mutation Assay: Evaluation of
Gases and Volatile Liquids. In: Genotoxic Effects of Airborne Agents Tice R.R., Costa D.L.and
Schaich K.M. (Eds.). New York, Plenum, pp. 91-103.
54) Zamora, P.O., Benson, J.M., Li, A.P. and Brooks, A.L. (1983). Evaluation of an Exposure System
Using Cells Grown on Collagen Gels for Detecting Highly Volatile Mutagens in the CHO/HGPRT
Mutation Assay. Environ. Mutagen., 5 (6): 795-801.
55) Asakura M., Sasaki T., Sugiyama T., Arito H., Fukushima, S. and Matsushima, T. (2008), An
Improved System for Exposure of Cultured Mammalian Cells to Gaseous Compounds in the
Chromosomal Aberration Assay. Mutation Res., 652 (2): 122-130.
56) Arlett C.F., et al. (1989). Mammalian Cell Gene Mutation Assays Based upon Colony Formation.
In: Statistical Evaluation of Mutagenicity Test Data, Kirkland, D.J. (Ed.), CambridgeUniversity
Press, pp. 66-101.
57) Morita T., Honma M. and Morikawa K. (2012), Effect of Reducing the Top Concentration Used
in the In Vitro Chromosomal Aberration Test in CHL Cells on the Evaluation of Industrial
Chemical Genotoxicity. Mutation Res., 741 (1-2): 32-56.
58) Brookmire L., Chen J.J. and Levy D.D. (2013). Evaluation of the Highest Concentrations Used in
the In Vitro Chromosome Aberrations Assay. Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 54 (1): 36-43.
59) USFDA. (2012). International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Guidance S2 (R1) on
Genotoxicity Testing and Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended For Human Use.
Available at: [https://www.federalregister.gov/a/2012-13774].
60) Honma M. and Hayashi M. (2011). Comparison of In Vitro Micronucleus and Gene Mutation
Assay Results for P53-Competent Versus P53-Deficient Human Lymphoblastoid Cells. Environ.
Mol. Mutagen., 52 (5): 373-384.
61) Moore-Brown, M.M., Clive, D., Howard, B.E., Batson, A.G. and Johnson, K.O. (1981). The
Utilization of Trifluorothymidine (TFT) to Select for Thymidine Kinase-Deficient (TK-/-)
Mutants from L5178Y/TK+/- Mouse Lymphoma Cells, Mutation Res., 85 (5): 363-378.
62) Liber H.L., Yandell D.W. and Little J.B. (1989). A Comparison of Mutation Induction at the TK
and HRPT Loci in Human Lymphoblastoid Cells; Quantitative Differences are Due to an
Additional Class of Mutations at the Autosomal TK locus. Mutation Res., 216 (1): 9-17.
63) Furth E.E., Thilly, W.G., Penman, B.W., Liber, H.L. and Rand, W.M. (1981), Quantitative Assay
for Mutation in Diploid Human Lymphoblasts Using Microtiter Plates. Anal. Biochem., 110 (1):
1-8.

-- 19 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
20
© OECD, (2016)
64) Hayashi, M, Dearfield, K., Kasper, P., Lovell, D., Martus, H. J. and Thybaud, V. (2011).
Compilation and Use of Genetic Toxicity Historical Control Data, Mutation Res., 723 (2): 87-90.
65) Ryan T.P. (2000). Statistical Methods for Quality Improvement. John Wiley and Sons, New York
2nd Edition.
66) OECD (2014), Statistical analysis supporting the revision of the genotoxicity Test Guidelines.
Environmental, Health and Safety Publications, Series on Testing and Assessment (No. 199.),
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
67) Fleiss J.L., Levin B. and Paik M.C. (2003). Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, Third
Edition, New York: John Wiley & Sons.

-- 20 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
21
© OECD, (2016)
ANNEX 1:
DEFINITIONS
Aneugen: Any substance or process that, by interacting with the components of the mitotic and meiotic
cell division cycle, leads to aneuploidy in cells or organisms.
Aneuploidy: Any deviation from the normal diploid (or haploid) number of chromosomes by a
single chromosome or more than one, but not by entire set(s) of chromosomes (polyploidy).
Base-pair-substitution mutagens: Substances that cause substitution of base pairs in the DNA.
Cloning efficiency: The percentage of cells plated at a low density that are able to grow into a colony that
can be counted.
Clastogen: Any substance or process which causes structural chromosomal aberrations in populations
of cells or organisms.
Cytotoxicity: For the assays covered in this guideline, cytotoxicity is identified as a reduction in relative
total growth (RTG) or relative survival (RS) for the MLA and TK6, respectively.
Forward mutation: A gene mutation from the parental type to the mutant form which gives rise to an
alteration or a loss of the enzymatic activity or the function of the encoded protein.
Frameshift mutagens: Substances which cause the addition or deletion of single or multiple base pairs in the
DNA molecule.
Genotoxic: A general term encompassing all types of DNA or chromosomal damage, including DNA
breakage, adducts, rearrangements, mutations, chromosome aberrations, and aneuploidy. Not all types
of genotoxic effects result in mutations or stable chromosomal damage.
Mitotic recombination: During mitosis, recombination between homologous chromatids possibly resulting in
the induction of DNA double strand breaks or in a loss of heterozygosity.
Mutagenic: Produces a heritable change of DNA base-pair sequences(s) in genes or of the structure of
chromosomes (chromosome aberrations).
Mutant frequency (MF): The number of mutant cells observed divided by the number of viable cells.
Phenotypic expression time: The time after treatment during which the genetic alteration is fixed within the
genome and any preexisting gene products are depleted to the point that the phenotypic trait is altered.
Relative survival (RS): RS is used as the measure of treatment-related cytotoxicity in the TK6. It is the
relative cloning efficiency (CE) of cells plated immediately after the cell treatment adjusted by any loss of
cells during treatment as compared with the cloning efficiency of the negative control.
Relative suspension growth (RSG): For the MLA, the relative total two day suspension growth of the test
culture compared to the total two-day suspension growth of the negative/solvent control (Clive and

-- 21 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
22
© OECD, (2016)
Spector, 1975). The RSG should include the relative growth of the test culture compared to the
negative/solvent control during the treatment period.
Relative total growth (RTG): RTG is used as the measure of treatment-related cytotoxicity in the MLA. It
is a measure of relative (to the vehicle control) growth of test cultures during the, treatment, two-day
expression and mutant selection cloning phases of the test. The RSG of each test culture is multiplied by
the relative cloning efficiency of the test culture at the time of mutant selection and expressed relative to
the cloning efficiency of the negative/solvent control (Clive and Spector, 1975).
S9 liver fractions: Supernatant of liver homogenate after 9000g centrifugation, i.e. raw liver extract
S9 mix: Mix of the liver S9 fraction and cofactors necessary for metabolic enzyme activity.
Suspension growth (SG): The fold-increase in the number of cells over the course of the treatment and
expression phases of the MLA. The SG is calculated by multiplying the fold-increase on day 1 by the fold-
increase on day 2 for the short (3 or 4 hr) treatment. If a 24 hr treatment is used the SG is the fold-increase
during the 24 hr treatment multiplied by the fold increases on expression days 1 and 2.
Solvent control: General term to define the control cultures receiving the solvent alone used to dissolve the
test chemical.
Untreated controls: Untreated controls are cultures that receive no treatment (i.e. no test chemical nor
solvent) but are processed the same way as the cultures receiving the test chemical.

-- 22 of 24 --

OECD/OCDE 490
23
© OECD, (2016)
Annex 2:
FORMULAS
Cytotoxicity
For both versions (agar and microwell) of the MLA
Cytotoxicity is defined as the Relative Total Growth (RTG) which includes the Relative Suspension
Growth (RSG) during the 2 day expression period and the Relative Cloning Efficiency (RCE) obtained at
the time of mutant selection. RTG, RSG and RCE are all expressed as a percentage.
Calculation of RSG: Suspension Growth one (SG1) is the growth rate between day 0 and day 1 (cell
concentration at day 1 / cell concentration at day 0) and Suspension Growth two (SG2) is the growth rate
between day 1 and day 2 (cell concentration at day 2 / cell concentration at day 1). The RSG is the total SG
(SG1 X SG2) for the treated culture compared to the untreated/solvent control. That is: RSG = [SG1(test) x
SG2(test)] / [SG1(control) x SG2(control)] The SG1 should be calculated from the initial cell concentration used at
the beginning of cell treatment. The accounts for any differential cytotoxicity that occurs in the test
culture(s) during the cell treatment.
RCE is the relative cloning efficiency of the test culture compared to the relative cloning efficiency of the
untreated/solvent control obtained at the time of mutant selection.
Relative Total Growth (RTG): RTG=RSG x RCE
TK6
Relative Survival (RS):
Cytotoxicity is evaluated by relative survival, i.e. cloning efficiency (CE) of cells plated immediately after
treatment adjusted by any loss of cells during treatment as compared with cloning efficiency in the
negative controls (assigned a survival of 100%). The adjustment for cell loss during treatment can be
calculated as:
Adjusted CE = CE x Number of cells at the end of treatment
Number of cells at the beginning of treatment
The RS for a culture treated by a test chemical is calculated as:
RS = Adjusted CE in the treated culture x 100
Adjusted CE in the solvent control
Mutant frequency for both the MLA and TK6
Mutant frequency (MF) is the cloning efficiency of mutant colonies in selective medium (CEM) adjusted by
the cloning efficiency in non-selective medium at the time of mutant selection (CEV). That is,
MF=CEM/CEV. The calculation of these two cloning efficiencies is described below for the agar and
microwell cloning methods.
MLA Agar Version: In the soft agar version of the MLA, the number of colonies on the mutant selection
plate (CM) and number of colonies on the unselected or cloning efficiency (viable count) plate (CV) are
obtained by directly counting the clones. When 600 cells are plated for cloning efficiency (CE) for the

-- 23 of 24 --

490 OECD/OCDE
24
© OECD, (2016)
mutant selection (CEM) plates and the unselected or cloning efficiency (viable count) plates (CEV) and 3 x
106 cells are used for mutant selection,
CEM = CM / (3 x 106) = (CM / 3) x 10-6
CEV = CV / 600
MLA and TK6 Microwell Version: In the microwell version of the MLA, CM and CV are determined as the
product of the total number of microwells (TW) and the probable number of colonies per well (P) on
microwell plates.
CM = PM x TWM
CV = PV x TWV
From the zero term of the Poisson distribution (Furth et al., 1981), the P is given by
P = - ln (EW / TW)
Where, EW is empty wells and TW is total wells. Therefore,
CEM = CM / TM = (PM x TWM) / TM
CEV = CV / TV = (PV x TWV) / TV
For the microwell version of the MLA, small and large colony mutant frequencies will be calculated in an
identical manner, using the relevant number of empty wells for small and large colonies.
For TK6, small and large colony mutant frequencies are based on the early appearing and late appearing
mutants.

-- 24 of 24 --

