[SOURCE URL] https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2021/06/test-no-439-in-vitro-skin-irritation-reconstructed-human-epidermis-test-method_g1g59b2f/9789264242845-en.pdf
[CHARS] 70758

Test Guideline No. 439
In Vitro Skin Irritation: Reconstructed
Human Epidermis Test Method
25 June 2025
OECD Guidelines for the
Testing of Chemicals
Section 4
Health effects

-- 1 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
Adopted:
25 June 2025
© OECD (2025)
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/
1
OECD GUIDELINES FOR THE TESTING OF
CHEMICALS
In Vitro Skin Irritation: Reconstructed Human Epidermis Test Methods
INTRODUCTION
1. Skin irritation refers to the production of reversible damage to the skin occurring after
exposure to a substance or mixture [as defined by the United Nations (UN) Globally Harmonized
System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS)] (1). This Test Guideline (TG)
provides an in vitro procedure that may be used for the hazard identification of irritant chemicals
(substances and mixtures) in accordance with UN GHS Category 2 (1) (2). In member countries
or regions that do not adopt the optional UN GHS Category 3 (mild irritants), this TG can also be
used to identify non-classified chemicals. Therefore, depending on the regulatory framework and
the classification system in use, this TG may be used to determine the skin irritancy of chemicals
either as a stand-alone replacement test for in vivo skin irritation testing or as a partial
replacement test within a testing strategy (3).
2. The assessment of skin irritation has typically involved the use of laboratory animals
[OECD TG 404; originally adopted in 1981 and revised in 1992, 2002, and 2015] (4). For the
testing of corrosivity, three validated in vitro test methods have been adopted as OECD TGs 430,
431 and 435 (5) (6) (7). A Guidance Document (GD) 203 on Integrated Approaches to Testing
and Assessment (IATA) for Skin Corrosion and Irritation describes several modules which group
information sources and analysis tools and provides guidance on (i) how to integrate and use
existing test and non-test data for the assessment of skin irritation and skin corrosion potentials
of chemicals and (ii) proposes an approach when further testing is needed (3).
3. This TG addresses the human health endpoint skin irritation. It is based on the in vitro
test system of reconstructed human epidermis (RhE), which closely mimics the biochemical and
physiological properties of the upper parts of the human skin, i.e. the epidermis. The RhE test
system uses human derived non-transformed keratinocytes as cell source to reconstruct an
epidermal model with representative histology and cytoarchitecture. Performance Standards
(PS) are available to facilitate the validation and assessment of similar and modified RhE-based
test methods, in accordance with the principles of GD 34 (8) (9). This TG was originally adopted
in 2010, updated in 2013 to include additional test methods using the RhE models, updated in
2015 to refer to the GD 203 and introduce the use of an alternative procedure to measure viability,
and updated subsequently to include additional test methods using the RhE models. The last
update was made in 2024/5 to remove the EpiSkinTM model which is no longer commercially
available. The test method components of this method were used to define the essential test
method components of the Performance Standards (8). Moreover, the method's data relating to
identification of non-classified vs classified substances formed the main basis for defining the
specificity and sensitivity values of the original PS.

-- 2 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
2
4. The RhE-based test methods included in this TG are listed in Annex 2, which also
provides information on the type of validation study used to validate the respective test methods.
As noted in Annex 2, the Validated Reference Method (VRM) has been used to develop the
present TG and the PS (8). Following an independent peer-review, all methods included in this
TG were considered to meet the following minimum predictive capacity: 80% sensitivity, 70%
specificity, and 75% accuracy. Mutual Acceptance of Data will only be guaranteed for test
methods, which are validated according to the PS (8), if these test methods have been reviewed
and adopted by OECD. The test methods included in this TG can be used indiscriminately to
address countries’ requirements for test results from in vitro test methods for skin irritation, while
benefiting from the Mutual Acceptance of Data. The existing Performance Standards (8) remain valid
after the removal of the EpiSkin™ model.
5. Definitions of terms used in this document are provided in ANNEX 1 - .
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
6. A limitation of the TG, as demonstrated by the full prospective validation study assessing
and characterising RhE test methods (16), is that it does not allow the classification of chemicals
to the optional UN GHS Category 3 (mild irritants) (1). Thus, the regulatory framework in member
countries will decide how this TG will be used. For a full evaluation of local skin effects after a
single dermal exposure, the GD 203 on IATA should be consulted (3). It is recognized that the
use of human skin is subject to national and international ethical considerations and conditions.
7. This TG addresses the human health endpoint skin irritation. While this TG does not
provide adequate information on skin corrosion, it should be noted that OECD TG 431 on skin
corrosion is based on the same RhE test system, though using another protocol (6). This TG is
based on RhE models using human keratinocytes, which therefore represent in vitro the target
organ of the species of interest; moreover, it directly covers the initial step of the inflammatory
cascade/mechanism of action (cell and tissue damage resulting in localised trauma) that occurs
during irritation in vivo. A wide range of chemicals has been tested in the validation study of the
VRM underlying this TG and the database of the VRM validation study amounted to 58 chemicals
in total (16) (18) (23). The TG is applicable to solids, liquids, semi-solids and waxes. The liquids
may be aqueous or non-aqueous; solids may be soluble or insoluble in water. Whenever
possible, solids should be ground to a fine powder before application; no other pre-treatment of
the sample is required. Gases and aerosols have not been assessed yet in a validation study
(29). While it is conceivable that these can be tested using RhE technology, the current TG does
not allow testing of gases and aerosols.
8. When considering testing of mixtures, difficult-to-test chemicals (e.g. unstable), or test
chemicals not clearly within the applicability domain described in this TG, upfront consideration
should be given to whether the results of such testing will yield results that are meaningful
scientifically. Such considerations are not needed, when there is a regulatory requirement for
testing of the mixture. However, due to the fact that mixtures cover a wide spectrum of categories
and composition, and that only limited information is currently available on the testing of mixtures,
in cases where evidence can be demonstrated on the non-applicability of the TG to a specific
category of mixtures (e.g. following a strategy as proposed in Eskes et al (30)), the TG should
not be used for that specific category of mixtures. Similar care should be taken in case specific
chemical classes or physico-chemical properties are found not to be applicable to the current
TG. A study comparing in vitro and in vivo data for 65 agrochemical formulations revealed an
overall accuracy of 54% (based on 65 agrochemical formulations), a sensitivity of 44% (based

-- 3 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
3
on 25 formulations) and a specificity of 60% (based on 40 formulations). This data indicates a
lack of applicability of the RhE based in vitro skin irritation test for agrochemical formulations (47).
9. Test chemicals absorbing light in the same range as MTT formazan and test chemicals
able to directly reduce the vital dye MTT (to MTT formazan) may interfere with the cell viability
measurements and need the use of adapted controls for corrections (see paragraphs 27-33).
10. A single testing run composed of three replicate tissues should be sufficient for a test
chemical when the classification is unequivocal. However, in cases of borderline results, such as
non-concordant replicate measurements and/or mean percent viability equal to 50 ± 5%, a
second run should be considered, as well as a third one in case of discordant results between
the first two runs.
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST
11. The test chemical is applied topically to a three-dimensional RhE model, comprised of
non-transformed human-derived epidermal keratinocytes, which have been cultured to form a
multi-layered, highly differentiated model of the human epidermis. It consists of organized basal,
spinous and granular layers, and a multi-layered stratum corneum containing intercellular
lamellar lipid layers representing main lipid classes analogous to those found in vivo.
12. Chemical-induced skin irritation, manifested mainly by erythema and oedema, is the
result of a cascade of events beginning with penetration of the chemicals through the stratum
corneum where they may damage the underlying layers of keratinocytes and other skin cells.
The damaged cells may either release inflammatory mediators or induce an inflammatory
cascade which also acts on the cells in the dermis, particularly the stromal and endothelial cells
of the blood vessels. It is the dilation and increased permeability of the endothelial cells that
produce the observed erythema and oedema (29). Notably, the RhE-based test methods, in the
absence of any vascularisation in the in vitro test system, measure the initiating events in the
cascade, e.g. cell / tissue damage (16) (17), using cell viability as readout.
13. Cell viability in RhE model is measured by enzymatic conversion of the vital dye MTT
[3-(4, 5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide, Thiazolyl blue; CAS number 298-
93-1], into a blue formazan salt that is quantitatively measured after extraction from tissues (31).
Irritant chemicals are identified by their ability to decrease cell viability below the defined
threshold levels (i.e. ≤ 50%, for UN GHS Category 2). Depending on the regulatory framework
and applicability of the TG, test chemicals that produce cell viabilities above the defined threshold
level, may be considered non-irritants (i.e. > 50%, No Category).
DEMONSTRATION OF PROFICIENCY
14. Prior to routine use of any of the validated test methods that adhere to this TG (Annex
2), laboratories should demonstrate technical proficiency, using the ten Proficiency Substances
listed in Table 1. Users of specific methods included in the TG may want to consult Table 2 in
Annex 3 for indicative ranges of cell viability achieved for individual proficiency substances listed
in Table 1 below. In situations where, for instance, a listed substance is unavailable or cannot be
used for other justified reasons, another substance for which adequate in vivo and in vitro
reference data are available may be used (e.g. from the list of reference chemicals (8)) provided

-- 4 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
4
that the same selection criteria as described in Table 1 are applied. Using an alternative
proficiency substance should be justified.
15. As part of the proficiency testing, it is recommended that users verify the barrier
properties of the tissues after receipt as specified by the RhE model producer. This is particularly
important if tissues are shipped over long distance/time periods. Once a test method has been
successfully established and proficiency in its use has been acquired and demonstrated, such
verification will not be necessary on a routine basis.
Table 1. Proficiency Substances 1
Substance CAS NR In vivo
score2
Physical
state
UN GHS
Category
NON-CLASSIFIED SUBSTANCES (UN GHS No Category)
naphthalene acetic acid 86-87-3 0 Solid No Cat.
isopropanol 67-63-0 0.3 Liquid No Cat.
methyl stearate 112-61-
8
1 Solid No Cat.
heptyl butyrate 5870-
93-9
1.7 Liquid No Cat.
(Optional Cat.
3)3
hexyl salicylate 6259-
76-3
2 Liquid No Cat.
(Optional Cat.
3)3
CLASSIFIED SUBSTANCES (UN GHS Category 2)
cyclamen aldehyde 103-95-
7
2.3 Liquid Cat. 2
1-bromohexane4 111-25-
1
2.7 Liquid Cat. 2
potassium hydroxide (5%
aq.)
1310-
58-3
3 Liquid Cat. 2
1-methyl-3-phenyl-1-
piperazine4
5271-
27-2
3.3 Solid Cat. 2
heptanal 111-71-
7
3.4 Liquid Cat. 2
Notes:
1 The Proficiency Substances are a subset of the substances used in the validation study and the selection is based on the following criteria: (i)
the chemical substances are commercially available; (ii) they are representative of the full range of Draize irritancy scores (from non-irritant to
strong irritant); (iii) they have a well-defined chemical structure; (iv) they are representative of the chemical functionality used in the validation
process; (v) they provided reproducible in vitro results across multiple testing and multiple laboratories; (vi) they were correctly predicted in vitro,
and (vii) they are not associated with an extremely toxic profile (e.g. carcinogenic or toxic to the reproductive system) and they are not associated
with prohibitive disposal costs.
2 In vivo score in accordance with the OECD TG 404 (4).
3 Under this TG, the UN GHS optional Category 3 (mild irritants) (1) is considered as No Category.
4 1-methyl-3-phenyl-1-piperazine and 1-bromohexane can have variable results in different laboratories dependent on the supplier and could be
considered as suggested in paragraph 14.
PROCEDURE
16. The following is a description of the components and procedures of a RhE test method
for skin irritation assessment (See also Annex 3 for parameters related to each test method).
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for the test methods complying with this TG are available
(32) (33) (34) (35) (42) (44) (48). Even if EpiSkinTM is no longer commercially available, EpiSlkinTM

-- 5 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
5
supporting references are left in the Test Guideline for the exclusive purposes of data evaluation
and not data generation.
RHE TEST METHOD COMPONENTS
General Conditions
17. Non-transformed human keratinocytes should be used to reconstruct the epithelium.
Multiple layers of viable epithelial cells (basal layer, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum)
should be present under a functional stratum corneum. Stratum corneum should be multi-layered
containing the essential lipid profile to produce a functional barrier with robustness to resist rapid
penetration of cytotoxic benchmark chemicals, e.g. sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) or Triton X-
100. The barrier function should be demonstrated and may be assessed either by determination
of the concentration at which a benchmark chemical reduces the viability of the tissue by 50%
(IC50) after a fixed exposure time, or by determination of the exposure time required to reduce
cell viability by 50% (ET50) upon application of the benchmark chemical at a specified, fixed
concentration. The containment properties of the RhE model should prevent the passage of
material around the stratum corneum to the viable tissue, which would lead to poor modelling of
skin exposure. The RhE model should be free of contamination by bacteria, viruses,
mycoplasma, or fungi.
Functional conditions
Viability
18. The assay used for quantifying viability is the MTT assay (31). The viable cells of the
RhE tissue construct can reduce the vital dye MTT into a blue MTT formazan precipitate which
is then extracted from the tissue using isopropanol (or a similar solvent). The optical density (OD)
of the extraction solvent alone should be sufficiently small, i.e. OD < 0.1. The extracted MTT
formazan may be quantified using either a standard absorbance (OD) measurement or an
HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry procedure (36), as further explained in paragraph 33. The RhE
model users should ensure that each batch of the RhE model used meets defined criteria for the
negative control. An acceptability range (upper and lower limit) for the negative control OD values
(in the Skin Irritation Test Method conditions) is established by the RhE model developer/supplier.
Acceptability ranges for the validated RhE test methods included in this TG are given in Annex
3, Table 4. An HPLC/UPLC-Spectrophotometry user should use the negative control OD ranges
provided in Annex 3, Table 4 as the acceptance criterion for the negative control. It should be
documented that the tissues treated with the negative control are stable in culture (provide similar
viability measurements) for the duration of the test exposure period.
Barrier function
19. The stratum corneum and its lipid composition should be sufficient to resist the rapid
penetration of cytotoxic benchmark chemicals, e.g. SDS or Triton X-100, as estimated by IC50
or ET50 (Annex 3, Table 5).
Morphology
20. Histological examination of the RhE model should be provided demonstrating human
epidermis-like structure (including multi-layered stratum corneum).

-- 6 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
6
Reproducibility
21. The results of the positive and negative controls of the test method should demonstrate
reproducibility over time.
Quality control (QC)
22. The RhE model should only be used if the developer/supplier demonstrates that each
batch of the RhE model used meets defined production release criteria, among which those for
viability (paragraph 18), barrier function (paragraph 19) and morphology (paragraph 20) are the
most relevant. These data should be provided to the test method users, so that they are able to
include this information in the test report. An acceptability range (upper and lower limit) for the
IC50 or the ET50 should be established by the RhE model developer/supplier. Only results
produced with qualified tissues can be accepted for reliable prediction of irritation classification.
The acceptability ranges for the test methods included in this TG are given in Annex 3, Table 5.
Application of the Test Chemical and Control Substances
23. At least three replicates should be used for each test chemical and for the controls in
each run. For liquid as well as solid chemicals, sufficient amount of test chemical should be
applied to uniformly cover the epidermis surface, i.e. ranging from 26 to 83 μL/cm2 or mg/cm2
(see Annex 3). For solid chemicals, the epidermis surface should be moistened with deionised
or distilled water before application, to improve contact between the test chemical and the
epidermis surface. Whenever possible, solids should be tested as a fine powder. A nylon mesh
may be used as a spreading aid for all test conditions (see Annex 3). At the end of the exposure
period, the test chemical should be carefully washed from the epidermis surface with aqueous
buffer, or 0.9% NaCl. Depending on the RhE test methods used, the exposure period ranges
between 15 and 60 minutes, and the incubation temperature between 20 and 37°C. These
exposure periods and temperatures are optimized for each individual RhE test method and
represent the different intrinsic properties of the test methods (e.g. barrier function) (see Annex
3).
24. Concurrent negative control (NC) and positive control (PC) should be used in each run
to demonstrate that viability (using the NC), barrier function and resulting tissue sensitivity (using
the PC) of the tissues are within a defined historical acceptance range. The suggested PC is 5%
aqueous SDS. The suggested NCs is either water or phosphate buffered saline (PBS).
Cell Viability Measurements
25. According to the test procedure, it is essential that the viability measurement is not
performed immediately after exposure to the test chemical, but after a sufficiently long post-
treatment incubation period of the rinsed tissue in fresh medium. This period allows both for
recovery from weak cytotoxic effects and for appearance of clear cytotoxic effects. A 42 hours
post-treatment incubation period was found optimal during test optimisation of two of the RhE-
based test methods underlying this TG (11) (12) (13) (14) (15), and is now a standard parameter
for all test methods included in this TG
26. The MTT assay is a standardised quantitative method which should be used to measure
cell viability under this TG. It is compatible with use in a three-dimensional tissue construct. The
tissue sample is placed in MTT solution of appropriate concentration (e.g. 0.3 - 1 mg/mL) for 3
hours. The MTT is converted into blue formazan by the viable cells. The precipitated blue

-- 7 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
7
formazan product is then extracted from the tissue using a solvent (e.g. isopropanol, acidic
isopropanol), and the concentration of formazan is measured by determining the OD at 570 nm
using a filter band pass of maximum ± 30 nm or, by using an HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry
procedure (see paragraph 33) (36).
27. Optical properties of the test chemical or its chemical action on MTT (e.g. chemicals
may prevent or reverse the colour generation as well as cause it) may interfere with the assay
leading to a false estimate of viability. This may occur when a specific test chemical is not
completely removed from the tissue by rinsing or when it penetrates the epidermis. If a test
chemical acts directly on the MTT (e.g. MTT-reducer), is naturally coloured, or becomes coloured
during tissue treatment, additional controls should be used to detect and correct for test chemical
interference with the viability measurement technique (see paragraphs 28 and 32). Detailed
description of how to correct direct MTT reduction and interferences by colouring agents is
available in the SOPs for the validated test methods included in this TG (32) (33) (34) (35) (42)
(44) (48).
28. To identify direct MTT reducers, each test chemical should be added to freshly prepared
MTT solution. If the MTT mixture containing the test chemical turns blue/purple, the test chemical
is presumed to directly reduce MTT and a further functional check on non-viable RhE tissues
should be performed, independently of using the standard absorbance (OD) measurement or an
HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry procedure. This additional functional check employs killed
tissues that possess only residual metabolic activity but absorb the test chemical in a similar way
as viable tissues. Each MTT reducing test chemical is applied on at least two killed tissue
replicates which undergo the entire testing procedure to generate a non-specific MTT reduction
(NSMTT) (32) (33) (34) (35) (42) (44) (48). A single NSMTT control is sufficient per test chemical
regardless of the number of independent tests/runs performed. The true tissue viability is then
calculated as the percent tissue viability obtained with living tissues exposed to the MTT reducer
minus the percent non-specific MTT reduction obtained with the killed tissues exposed to the
same MTT reducer, calculated relative to the negative control run concurrently to the test being
corrected (%NSMTT).
29. To identify potential interference by coloured test chemicals or test chemicals that
become coloured when in contact with water or isopropanol and decide on the need for additional
controls, spectral analysis of the test chemical in water (environment during exposure) and/or
isopropanol (extracting solution) should be performed. If the test chemical in water and/or
isopropanol absorbs light in the range of 570 ± 30 nm, further colorant controls should be
performed or, alternatively, an HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry procedure should be used in
which case these controls are not required (see paragraphs 32 and 33). When performing the
standard absorbance (OD) measurement, each interfering-coloured test chemical is applied on
at least two viable tissue replicates, which undergo the entire testing procedure but are incubated
with medium instead of MTT solution during the MTT incubation step to generate a non-specific
colour (NSCliving) control. The NSCliving control needs to be performed concurrently to the
testing of the coloured test chemical and in case of multiple testing, an independent NSCliving
control needs to be conducted with each test performed (in each run) due to the inherent
biological variability of living tissues. The true tissue viability is then calculated as the percent
tissue viability obtained with living tissues exposed to the interfering test chemical and incubated
with MTT solution minus the percent non-specific colour obtained with living tissues exposed to
the interfering test chemical and incubated with medium without MTT, run concurrently to the test
being corrected (%NSCliving).
30. Test chemicals that are identified as producing both direct MTT reduction (see
paragraph 28) and colour interference (see paragraph 29) will also require a third set of controls,

-- 8 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
8
apart from the NSMTT and NSCliving controls described in the previous paragraphs, when
performing the standard absorbance (OD) measurement. This is usually the case with darkly
coloured test chemicals interfering with the MTT assay (e.g., blue, purple, black) because their
intrinsic colour impedes the assessment of their capacity to directly reduce MTT as described in
paragraph 28. These test chemicals may bind to both living and killed tissues and therefore the
NSMTT control may not only correct for potential direct MTT reduction by the test chemical, but
also for colour interference arising from the binding of the test chemical to killed tissues. This
could lead to a double correction for colour interference since the NSCliving control already
corrects for colour interference arising from the binding of the test chemical to living tissues. To
avoid a possible double correction for colour interference, a third control for non-specific colour
in killed tissues (NSCkilled) needs to be performed. In this additional control, the test chemical is
applied on at least two killed tissue replicates, which undergo the entire testing procedure but are
incubated with medium instead of MTT solution during the MTT incubation step. A single
NSCkilled control is sufficient per test chemical regardless of the number of independent
tests/runs performed but should be performed concurrently to the NSMTT control and, where
possible, with the same tissue batch. The true tissue viability is then calculated as the percent
tissue viability obtained with living tissues exposed to the test chemical minus %NSMTT minus
%NSCliving plus the percent non-specific colour obtained with killed tissues exposed to the
interfering test chemical and incubated with medium without MTT, calculated relative to the
negative control run concurrently to the test being corrected (%NSCkilled).
31. It is important to note that non-specific MTT reduction and non-specific colour
interferences may increase the readouts of the tissue extract above the linearity range of the
spectrophotometer. On this basis, each laboratory should determine the linearity range of their
spectrophotometer with MTT formazan (CAS # 57360-69-7) from a commercial source before
initiating the testing of test chemicals for regulatory purposes. The standard absorbance (OD)
measurement using a spectrophotometer is appropriate to assess direct MTT-reducers and
colour interfering test chemicals when the ODs of the tissue extracts obtained with the test
chemical without any correction for direct MTT reduction and/or colour interference are within the
linear range of the spectrophotometer or when the uncorrected percent viability obtained with the
test chemical is already ≤ 50%. Nevertheless, results for test chemicals producing %NSMTT
and/or %NSCliving ≥ 50% of the negative control should be taken with caution as this is the cut-
off used to distinguish classified from non-classified chemicals (see paragraph 35).
32. For coloured test chemicals which are not compatible with the standard absorbance
(OD) measurement due to too strong interference with the MTT assay, the alternative
HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry procedure to measure MTT formazan may be employed (see
paragraph 33) (36). The HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry system allows for the separation of the
MTT formazan from the test chemical before its quantification (36). For this reason, NSCliving or
NSCkilled controls are never required when using HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry,
independently of the chemical being tested. NSMTT controls should nevertheless be used if the
test chemical is suspected to directly reduce MTT or has a colour that impedes the assessment
of the capacity to directly reduce MTT (as described in paragraph 28). When using HPLC/UPLC-
spectrophotometry to measure MTT formazan, the percent tissue viability is calculated as percent
MTT formazan peak area obtained with living tissues exposed to the test chemical relative to the
MTT formazan peak obtained with the concurrent negative control. For test chemicals able to
directly reduce MTT, true tissue viability is calculated as the percent tissue viability obtained with
living tissues exposed to the test chemical minus %NSMTT. Finally, it should be noted that direct
MTT-reducers that may also be colour interfering, which are retained in the tissues after
treatment and reduce MTT so strongly that they lead to ODs (using standard OD measurement)
or peak areas (using UPLC/HPLC-spectrophotometry) of the tested tissue extracts that fall

-- 9 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
9
outside of the linearity range of the spectrophotometer cannot be assessed, although these are
expected to occur in only very rare situations.
33. HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry may be used also with all types of test chemicals
(coloured, non-coloured, MTT-reducers and non-MTT reducers) for measurement of MTT
formazan (36). Due to the diversity of HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry systems, qualification of
the HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry system should be demonstrated before its use to quantify
MTT formazan from tissue extracts by meeting the acceptance criteria for a set of standard
qualification parameters based on those described in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
guidance for industry on bio-analytical method validation (36) (37). These key parameters and
their acceptance criteria are shown in Annex 4. Once the acceptance criteria defined in Annex 4
have been met, the HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry system is considered qualified and ready to
measure MTT formazan under the experimental conditions described in this TG.
Acceptability Criteria
34. For each test method using valid RhE model batches (see paragraph 22), tissues treated
with the negative control should exhibit OD reflecting the quality of the tissues that followed
shipment, receipt steps and all protocol processes. Control OD values should not be below
historically established boundaries. Similarly, tissues treated with the PC, i.e. 5% aqueous SDS,
should reflect their ability to respond to an irritant chemical under the conditions of the test method
(see Annex 3 and for further information SOPs of the test methods included in this TG (32) (33)
(34) (35) (42) (44) (48). Associated and appropriate measures of variability between tissue
replicates, i.e., standard deviations (SD) should fall within the acceptance limits established for
the test method used (see Annex 3).
Interpretation of Results and Prediction Model
35. The OD values obtained with each test chemical can be used to calculate the
percentage of viability normalised to the negative control, which is set to 100%. In case
HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry is used, the percent tissue viability is calculated as percent MTT
formazan peak area obtained with living tissues exposed to the test chemical relative to the MTT
formazan peak obtained with the concurrent negative control. The cut-off value of percentage
cell viability distinguishing irritant from non-classified test chemicals and the statistical
procedure(s) used to evaluate the results and identify irritant chemicals should be clearly defined,
documented, and proven to be appropriate (see SOPs of the test methods for information). The
cut-off values for the prediction of irritation are given below:
• The test chemical is identified as requiring classification and labelling according to
UN GHS (Category 2 or Category 1) if the mean percent tissue viability after
exposure and post-treatment incubation is less than or equal (≤) to 50%. Since the
RhE test methods covered by this TG cannot resolve between UN GHS Categories
1 and 2, further information on skin corrosion will be required to decide on its final
classification [see also the GD 203 (3)]. In case the test chemical is found to be
non-corrosive (e.g., based on TG 430, 431 or 435), and shows tissue viability after
exposure and post-treatment incubation is less than or equal (≤) to 50%, the test
chemical is considered to be irritant to skin in accordance with UN GHS Category
2.
• Depending on the regulatory framework in member countries (e.g., in case of non-
adoption of the optional UN GHS Category 3), the test chemical may be considered

-- 10 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
10
as non-irritant to skin in accordance with UN GHS No Category if the tissue viability
after exposure and post-treatment incubation is more than (>) 50%.
DATA AND REPORTING
Data
36. For each run, data from individual replicate tissues (e.g. OD values and calculated
percentage cell viability data for each test chemical, including classification) should be reported
in tabular form, including data from repeat experiments as appropriate. In addition, means ± SD
for each run should be reported. Observed interactions with MTT reagent and coloured test
chemicals should be reported for each tested chemical.
Test Report
37. The test report should include the following information:
Test Chemical and Control Substances:
• Mono-constituent substance: chemical identification, such as IUPAC or CAS
name, CAS number, SMILES or InChI code, structural formula, purity, chemical
identity of impurities as appropriate and practically feasible, etc;
• Multi-constituent substance, UVCB and mixture: characterised as far as possible
by chemical identity (see above), including spectral information for UVCB if
possible, quantitative occurrence and relevant physicochemical properties of the
constituents;
• Physical appearance, water solubility, and any additional relevant physicochemical
properties;
• Source, lot number if available;
• Treatment of the test chemical/control substance prior to testing, if applicable (e.g.
warming, grinding);
• Stability of the test chemical, limit date for use, or date for re-analysis if known;
• Storage conditions.
RhE model and protocol used (and rationale for the choice, if applicable)
Test Conditions:
• RhE model used (including batch number);
• Calibration information for measuring device (e.g. spectrophotometer), wavelength
and band pass (if applicable) used for quantifying MTT formazan, and linearity
range of measuring device; Description of the method used to quantify MTT
formazan;
• Description of the qualification of the HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry system, if
applicable; Complete supporting information for the specific RhE model used
including its performance. This should include, but is not limited to;
i) Viability;
ii) Barrier function;

-- 11 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
11
iii) Morphology;
iv) Quality controls (QC) of the model;
• Reference to historical data of the model. This should include, but is not limited to
acceptability of the QC data with reference to historical batch data.
• Demonstration of proficiency in performing the test method before routine use by
testing of the proficiency substances.
Test Procedure:
• Details of the test procedure used (including washing procedures used after
exposure period); Doses of test chemical and control substances used;
• Duration and temperature of exposure and post-exposure incubation period;
• Indication of controls used for direct MTT-reducers and/or colouring test chemicals,
if applicable;
• Number of tissue replicates used per test chemical and controls (PC, negative
control, and NSMTT, NSCliving and NSCkilled, if applicable);
• Description of decision criteria/prediction model applied based on the RhE model
used;
• Description of any modifications to the test procedure (including washing
procedures).
Run and Test Acceptance Criteria:
• Positive and negative control mean values and acceptance ranges based on
historical data; Acceptable variability between tissue replicates for positive and
negative controls;
• Acceptable variability between tissue replicates for test chemical.
Results:
• Tabulation of data for individual test chemical for each run and each replicate
measurement including OD or MTT formazan peak area, percent tissue viability,
mean percent tissue viability and SD;
• If applicable, results of controls used for direct MTT-reducers and/or colouring test
chemicals including OD or MTT formazan peak area, %NSMTT, %NSCliving,
%NSCkilled, SD, final correct percent tissue viability;
• Results obtained with the test chemical(s) and control substances in relation to the
defined run and test acceptance criteria;
• Description of other effects observed;
• The derived classification with reference to the prediction model/decision criteria
used.
Discussion of the results
• Any deviations from the guideline that are identified during the test, and whether
they impacted the results from the assay or not.

-- 12 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
12
Conclusions
LITERATURE
1. United Nations (UN). (2023). Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling
of Chemicals (GHS), 10th Revised Edition, UN New York and Geneva, 2023. Available at:
[https://unece.org/ghs-rev10-2023].
2. EURL-ECVAM. (2009). Statement on the “Performance Under UN GHS of Three In vitro
Assays for Skin Irritation Testing and the Adaptation of the Reference Chemicals and
Defined Accuracy Values of the ECVAM Skin Irritation Performance Standards”, Issued by
the ECVAM Scientific Advisory Committee (ESAC30), 9 April 2009. Available at:
[http://ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-testing]
3. OECD. (2014). Guidance Document on Integrated Approaches to Testing and Assessment
for Skin Irritation/Corrosion. Environment, Health and Safety Publications, Series on
Testing and Assessment (No. 203), Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Paris.
4. OECD. (2015). OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals. (No. 404.): Acute Dermal
Irritation, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
5. OECD. (2015). OECD Guideline for the Testing of Chemicals (No. 430.): In vitro Skin
Corrosion: Transcutaneous Electrical Resistance (TER).
6. OECD. (202X). OECD Guideline for the Testing of Chemicals (No. 431.): In vitro Skin
Model. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
7. OECD. (2015). OECD Guideline for the Testing of Chemicals (No. 435.); In vitro Membrane
Barrier Test Method. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
8. OECD. (2015). Performance Standards for the Assessment of Proposed Similar or
Modified In vitro Reconstructed Human Epidermis (RhE) Test Methods for Skin Irritation in
Relation to TG 439. Environment, health and Safety Publications, Series on Testing and
Assessment (No. 220). Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
9. OECD. (2005). Guidance Document on the Validation and International Acceptance of New
or Updated Test Methods for Hazard Assessment. Environment, Health and Safety
Publications, Series on Testing and Assessment (No. 34.) Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development, Paris.
10. Fentem, J.H., Briggs, D., Chesné, C., Elliot, G.R., Harbell, J.W., Heylings, J.R., Portes, P.,
Roguet, R., van de Sandt, J.J. M. and Botham, P. (2001). A Prevalidation Study on In vitro
Tests for Acute Skin Irritation, Results and Evaluation by the Management Team, Toxicol.
in vitro 15, 57-93.
11. Portes, P., Grandidier, M.-H., Cohen, C. and Roguet, R. (2002). Refinement of the EPISKIN
Protocol for the Assessment of Acute Skin Irritation of Chemicals: Follow-Up to the ECVAM
Prevalidation Study, Toxicol. in vitro 16, 765–770.
12. Kandárová, H., Liebsch, M., Genschow, E., Gerner, I., Traue, D., Slawik, B. and Spielmann,
H. (2004). Optimisation of the EpiDerm Test Protocol for the Upcoming ECVAM Validation
Study on In vitro Skin Irritation Tests, ALTEX 21, 107–114.
13. Kandárová, H., Liebsch, M., Gerner, I., Schmidt, E., Genschow, E., Traue, D. and
Spielmann, H. (2005), The EpiDerm Test Protocol for the Upcoming ECVAM Validation
Study on In vitro Skin Irritation Tests – An Assessment of the Performance of the Optimised
Test, ATLA 33, 351-367.
14. Cotovio, J., Grandidier, M.-H., Portes, P., Roguet, R. and Rubinsteen, G. (2005). The In
vitro Acute Skin Irritation of Chemicals: Optimisation of the EPISKIN Prediction Model
Within the Framework of the ECVAM Validation Process, ATLA 33, 329-349.

-- 13 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
13
15. Zuang, V., Balls, M., Botham, P.A., Coquette, A., Corsini, E., Curren, R.D., Elliot, G.R.,
Fentem, J.H., Heylings, J.R., Liebsch, M., Medina, J., Roguet, R., van De Sandt, J.J.M.,
Wiemann, C. and Worth, A. (2002). Follow-Up to the ECVAM Prevalidation Study on In
vitro Tests for Acute Skin Irritation, The European Centre for the Validation of Alternative
Methods Skin Irritation Task Force report 2, ATLA 30, 109-129.
16. Spielmann, H., Hoffmann, S., Liebsch, M., Botham, P., Fentem, J., Eskes, C., Roguet, R.,
Cotovio, J., Cole, T., Worth, A., Heylings, J., Jones, P., Robles, C., Kandárová, H., Gamer,
A., Remmele, M., Curren, R., Raabe, H., Cockshott, A., Gerner, I. and Zuang, V. (2007).
The ECVAM International Validation Study on In vitro Tests for Acute Skin Irritation: Report
on the Validity of the EPISKIN and EpiDerm Assays and on the Skin Integrity Function
Test, ATLA 35, 559-601.
17. Hoffmann S. (2006). ECVAM Skin Irritation Validation Study Phase II: Analysis of the
Primary Endpoint MTT and the Secondary Endpoint IL1-α. Available at:
[http://ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-testing]
18. Eskes C., Cole, T., Hoffmann, S., Worth, A., Cockshott, A., Gerner, I. and Zuang, V. (2007).
The ECVAM International Validation Study on In vitro Tests for Acute Skin Irritation:
Selection of Test Chemicals, ATLA 35, 603-619.
19. Cotovio, J., Grandidier, M.-H., Lelièvre, D., Roguet, R., Tinois-Tessonneaud, E. and
Leclaire, J. (2007). In vitro Acute Skin Irritancy of Chemicals Using the Validated EPISKIN
Model in a Tiered Strategy - Results and Performances with 184 Cosmetic Ingredients,
AATEX, 14, 351-358.
20. EURL-ECVAM. (2007). Statement on the Validity of In vitro Tests for Skin Irritation, Issued
by the ECVAM Scientific Advisory Committee (ESAC26), 27 April 2007. Available at:
[http://www.ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-testing].
21. EURL-ECVAM. (2007). Performance Standards for Applying Human Skin Models to In vitro
Skin Irritation Testing. Available at: [http://ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-
testing]
N.B. These are the original PS used for the validation of two test methods. These PS should
not be used any longer as an updated version (8) is now available.
22. EURL-ECVAM. (2008). Statement on the Scientific Validity of In vitro Tests for Skin
Irritation Testing, Issued by the ECVAM Scientific Advisory Committee (ESAC29), 5
November 2008. Available at: [http://ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-
testing].
23. OECD. (2010). Explanatory Background Document to the OECD Draft Test Guideline on
In vitro Skin Irritation Testing. Environment, Health and Safety Publications. Series on
Testing and Assessment, (No. 137.), Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Paris.
24. Katoh, M., Hamajima, F., Ogasawara, T. and Hata K. (2009). Assessment of Human
Epidermal Model LabCyte EPI-MODEL for In vitro Skin Irritation Testing According to
European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM)-Validated Protocol, J
Toxicol Sci, 34, 327-334
25. Katoh, M. and Hata K. (2011). Refinement of LabCyte EPI-MODEL24 Skin Irritation Test
Method for Adaptation to the Requirements of OECD Test Guideline 439, AATEX, 16, 111-
122
26. OECD. (2011). Validation Report for the Skin Irritation Test Method Using LabCyte EPI-
MODEL24. Environment, Health and Safety Publications, Series on Testing and
Assessment (No. 159.), Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.

-- 14 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
14
27. OECD. (2011). Peer Review Report of Validation of the Skin Irritation Test Using LabCyte
EPI-MODEL24. Environment, Health and Safety Publications, Series on Testing and
Assessment (No. 155.), Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
28. Kojima, H., Ando, Y., Idehara, K., Katoh, M., Kosaka, T., Miyaoka, E., Shinoda, S., Suzuki,
T., Yamaguchi, Y., Yoshimura, I., Yuasa, A., Watanabe, Y. and Omori, T. (2012). Validation
Study of the In vitro Skin Irritation Test with the LabCyte EPI-MODEL24, Altern Lab Anim,
40, 33-50.
29. Welss, T., Basketter, D.A. and Schröder, K.R. (2004). In vitro Skin Irritation: Fact and
Future. State of the Art Review of Mechanisms and Models, Toxicol. In vitro 18, 231-243.
30. Eskes, C. et al. (2012). Regulatory Assessment of In vitro Skin Corrosion and Irritation Data
within the European Framework: Workshop Recommendations. Regul. Toxicol.
Pharmacol. 62, 393-403).
31. Mosmann, T. (1983). Rapid Colorimetric Assay for Cellular Growth and Survival:
Application to Proliferation and Cytotoxicity Assays, J. Immunol. Methods 65, 55-63.
32. EpiSkin™. (February 2009). SOP, Version 1.8, ECVAM Skin Irritation Validation Study:
Validation of the EpiSkin™ Test Method 15 min - 42 hours for the Prediction of acute Skin
Irritation of Chemicals. Available at: [http://www.ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-
animal-testing.html].
33. EpiDerm™. (Revised March 2009). SOP, Version 7.0, Protocol for: In vitro EpiDerm™ Skin
Irritation Test (EPI-200-SIT), for Use with MatTek Corporation's Reconstructed Human
Epidermal Model EpiDerm (EPI-200). Available at:
[http://www.ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-testing.html].
34. SkinEthic™ RHE SOP, Version 2.0 (February 2009), SkinEthic Skin Irritation Test-42bis
Test Method for the Prediction of Acute Skin Irritation of Chemicals: 42 Minutes Application
+ 42 Hours Post-Incubation. Available at:
[http://www.ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-testing.html].
35. LabCyte. (June 2011). EPI-MODEL24 SIT SOP, Version 8.3, Skin Irritation Test Using the
Reconstructed Human Model “LabCyte EPI-MODEL24” Available at:
[http://www.jpte.co.jp/english/business/LabCyte/Testprotocol.pdf].
36. Alépée, N., Barroso, J., De Smedt, A., De Wever, B., Hibatallah, J., Klaric, M., Mewes,
K.R., Millet, M., Pfannenbecker, U., Tailhardat, M., Templier, M., and McNamee, P. (2015)
Use of HPLC/UPLC-Spectrophotometry for Detection of MTT Formazan in In vitro
Reconstructed Human Tissue (RhT)-Based Test Methods Employing the MTT Assay to
Expand their Applicability to Strongly Coloured Test Chemicals. Toxicol In vitro. 29(4), 741-
761.
37. US FDA. (2001). Guidance for Industry: Bioanalytical Method Validation. U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. May 2001. Available at:
[http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/ucm070107.pdf].
38. Harvell, J.D., Lamminstausta, K., and Maibach, H.I. (1995). Irritant Contact Dermatitis, in:
Practical Contact Dermatitis, pp 7-18, (Ed. Guin J. D.). Mc Graw-Hill, New York.
39. EURL-ECVAM. (2009). Performance Standards for In vitro Skin Irritation Test Methods
Based on Reconstructed Human Epidermis (RhE). Available at:
[http://www.ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-testing]
N.B. This is the current version of the ECVAM PS, updated in 2009 in view of the
implementation of UN GHS. These PS should not be used any longer as an updated version
(8) is now available related to the present TG.
40. EURL-ECVAM. (2009). ESAC Statement on the Performance Standards (PS) for In vitro
Skin Irritation Testing Using Reconstructed Human Epidermis, Issued by the ECVAM
Scientific Advisory Committee (ESAC31), 8 July 2009. Available at:
[http://www.ihcp.jrc.ec.europa.eu/our_activities/alt-animal-testing].

-- 15 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
15
41. EC. (2001). Commission Directive 2001/59/EC of 6 August 2001 Adapting to Technical
Progress for the 28th Time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the Approximation of Laws,
Regulations and Administrative Provisions Relating to the Classification, Packaging and
Labelling of Dangerous Substances, Official Journal of the European Union L225, 1-333.
42. Skin+ ® RHE SOP, Version 5.0 (May 2016), Skin Irritation Test for the Prediction of Acute
Skin Irritation of Chemicals with Sterlab’s RHE: 42 Minutes Application + 42 Hours Post-
Incubation. Available at [http://www.sterlab-store.com/wp-
content/uploads/SOP_Sterlab_skin_irritation_v5-May-2016.pdf].
43. Peer Review Report of the Validation of the Skin Irritation Tests Using Skin+ ® and Using
epiCS® (2018)
44. epiCS® RHE SOP, Version 5.1 (January 2017) Skin Irritation Test for use with CellSystems
Reconstructed Human Epidermal Model epiCS® Test Method 20 min application + 42
hours Post-Incubation. Available at [https://reconstructed-human-epidermis.com/user-
data/downloads/manuels-
sops/INVITTOX%20protocol%20epiCS%20Skin%20Irritation%20version%205.1%2C%20
01.2017.pdf].
45. ESAC Opinion on the Validation Study of the epiCS® Test Method based on the EURL
ECVAM/OECD Performance Standards for in vitro Skin Irritation Testing using
Reconstructed human Epidermis (RhE), ESAC Opinion Number 2016-05
46. EURL ECVAM Status Report on the Development, Validation and Regulatory Acceptance
of Alternative Methods and Approaches (2016)
47. Kolle S.N, van Ravenzwaay B. and Landsiedel R. (2017). Regulatory accepted but out of
domain: In vitro skin irritation tests for agrochemical formulations. Regul. Toxicol.
Pharmacol 89, 125-130.
48. KeraSkinTM SIT SOP, Version 1.5 (January, 2019), KeraSkinTM skin irritation test operation
protocol. Available at: [http://www.keraskin.co.kr/eng/product/skinmodel.asp]
49. Jung, K.M., Lee, S.H., Jang, W.H., Jung, H.S., Heo, Y., Park, Y.H., Bae, S., Lim, K.M.,
Seok, S.H., 2014. KeraSkin-VM: a novel reconstructed human epidermis model for skin
irritation tests. Toxicology in vitro: an international journal published in association with
BIBRA 28, 742-750.
50. Han, J., Kim, S., Lee, S.H., Kim, J.S., Chang, Y.J., Jeong, T.C., Kang, M.J., Kim, T.S.,
Yoon, H.S., Lee, G.Y., Bae, S., Lim, K.M., 2020. Me-too validation study for in vitro skin
irritation test with a reconstructed human epidermis model, KeraSkin for OECD test
guideline 439. Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology: 117, 104725.
51. OECD (2021). Validation study report and Independent Peer-Review Report for inclusion
of KeraSkinTM SIT to the Test Guideline 439 on In Vitro Skin Irritation: Reconstructed
Human Epidermis Test Method. Environment, Health and Safety Publications, Series on
Testing and Assessment (No. 339.), Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Paris.

-- 16 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
16
ANNEX 1 - DEFINITIONS
Accuracy: The closeness of agreement between test method results and accepted reference
values. It is a measure of test method performance and one aspect of relevance. The term is
often used interchangeably with “concordance” to mean the proportion of correct outcomes of a
test method (9).
Cell viability: Parameter measuring total activity of a cell population e.g. as ability of cellular
mitochondrial dehydrogenases to reduce the vital dye MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-
diphenyltetrazolium bromide, Thiazolyl blue), which depending on the endpoint measured and
the test design used, correlates with the total number and/or vitality of living cells.
Chemical: means a substance or a mixture.
Concordance: This is a measure of test method performance for test methods that give a
categorical result, and is one aspect of relevance. The term is sometimes used interchangeably
with accuracy, and is defined as the proportion of all chemicals tested that are correctly classified
as positive or negative. Concordance is highly dependent on the prevalence of positives in the
types of test chemical being examined (9).
ET50: Can be estimated by determination of the exposure time required to reduce cell viability
by 50% upon application of the benchmark chemical at a specified, fixed concentration, see also
IC50.
GHS (Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals by the
United Nations (UN)): A system proposing the classification of chemicals (substances and
mixtures) according to standardized types and levels of physical, health and environmental
hazards, and addressing corresponding communication elements, such as pictograms, signal
words, hazard statements, precautionary statements and safety data sheets, so that to convey
information on their adverse effects with a view to protect people (including employers, workers,
transporters, consumers and emergency responders) and the environment (1).
HPLC: High Performance Liquid Chromatography.
IATA: Integrated Approach on Testing and Assessment
IC50: Can be estimated by determination of the concentration at which a benchmark chemical
reduces the viability of the tissues by 50% (IC50) after a fixed exposure time, see also ET50.
Mixture: means a mixture or a solution composed of two or more substances in which they do
not react.
Mono-constituent substance: A substance, defined by its quantitative composition, in which
one main constituent is present to at least 80% (w/w).
MTT: 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; Thiazolyl blue tetrazolium
bromide.
Multi-constituent substance: A substance, defined by its quantitative composition, in which
more than one main constituent is present in a concentration ≥ 10% (w/w) and < 80% (w/w). A
multi-constituent substance is the result of a manufacturing process. The difference between
mixture and multi-constituent substance is that a mixture is obtained by blending of two or more
substances without chemical reaction. A multi-constituent substance is the result of a chemical
reaction.

-- 17 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
17
NSCkilled: Non-Specific Colour in killed tissues.
NSCliving: Non-Specific Colour in living tissues.
NSMTT: Non-Specific MTT reduction.
Performance standards (PS): Standards, based on a validated test method, that provide a basis
for evaluating the comparability of a proposed test method that is mechanistically and functionally
similar. Included are; (i) essential test method components; (ii) a minimum list of Reference
Chemicals selected from among the chemicals used to demonstrate the acceptable performance
of the validated test method; and (iii) the comparable levels of accuracy and reliability, based on
what was obtained for the validated test method, that the proposed test method should
demonstrate when evaluated using the minimum list of Reference Chemicals (9).
PC: Positive Control, a replicate containing all components of a test system and treated with a
substance known to induce a positive response. To ensure that variability in the positive control
response across time can be assessed, the magnitude of the positive response should not be
excessive.
Relevance: Description of relationship of the test to the effect of interest and whether it is
meaningful and useful for a particular purpose. It is the extent to which the test correctly measures
or predicts the biological effect of interest. Relevance incorporates consideration of the accuracy
(concordance) of a test method (9).
Reliability: Measures of the extent that a test method can be performed reproducibly within and
between laboratories over time, when performed using the same protocol. It is assessed by
calculating intra- and inter-laboratory reproducibility (9).
Replacement test: A test which is designed to substitute for a test that is in routine use and
accepted for hazard identification and/or risk assessment, and which has been determined to
provide equivalent or improved protection of human or animal health or the environment, as
applicable, compared to the accepted test, for all possible testing situations and chemicals (9).
Run: A run consists of one or more test chemicals tested concurrently with a negative control
and with a PC.
Sensitivity: The proportion of all positive/active test chemicals that are correctly classified by the
test. It is a measure of accuracy for a test method that produces categorical results, and is an
important consideration in assessing the relevance of a test method (9).
Skin irritation in vivo: The production of reversible damage to the skin following the application
of a test chemical for up to 4 hours. Skin irritation is a locally arising reaction of the affected skin
tissue and appears shortly after stimulation (38). It is caused by a local inflammatory reaction
involving the innate (non-specific) immune system of the skin tissue. Its main characteristic is its
reversible process involving inflammatory reactions and most of the clinical characteristic signs
of irritation (erythema, oedema, itching and pain) related to an inflammatory process.
Specificity: The proportion of all negative/inactive test chemicals that are correctly classified by
the test. It is a measure of accuracy for a test method that produces categorical results and is an
important consideration in assessing the relevance of a test method (9).
Substance: means chemical elements and their compounds in the natural state or obtained by
any production process, including any additive necessary to preserve the stability of the product
and any impurities deriving from the process used, but excluding any solvent which may be
separated without affecting the stability of the substance or changing its composition.

-- 18 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
18
Test chemical: means what is tested.
UPLC: Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography.
UVCB: substances of unknown or variable composition, complex reaction products or biological
materials.

-- 19 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
19
ANNEX 2 - TEST METHODS INCLUDED IN THIS TG
Pre-validation, optimisation and validation studies have been completed for seven in vitro test
methods (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28)
(43) (45) (50) (51) based on the RhE test system with the following minimum of predictive
capacity: (80% sensitivity, 70% specificity, and 75% accuracy). Six of these in vitro test methods
are commercially available, only the EpiSkinTM method is no longer commercially available. Data
generated using the EpiSkinTM model remain covered by the Mutual Acceptance of Data.
Six other test methods are included in this TG and are listed below, together with the type of
validation study used to validate the respective test methods. EpiSkin™ and EpiDerm™ SIT (EPI-
200) have been used to develop the present TG and the PS (8). These Performance Standards
(8) remain valid after the removal of the EpiSkin™ model.
Nr. Test method
name Validation study type References
1 EpiSkin™
(VRM)
(No longer
commercially
available from
December 2024)
Full prospective validation study (2003-
2007). The test method components of
this method were used to define the
essential test method components of the
original and updated ECVAM PS (39) (40)
(21). Moreover, the method's data relating
to identification of non-classified vs
classified substances formed the main
basis for defining the specificity and
sensitivity values of the original PS*.
(2) (10) (11) (14)
(15) (16) (17)
(18) (19) (20)
(21) (23) (32)
(39) (40)
2 EpiDerm™ SIT
(EPI-200)
(VRM)
EpiDerm™ (original): Initially the test
method underwent full prospective
validation together with Nr. 1. from 2003-
2007. The test method components of this
method were used to define the essential
test methods components of the original
and updated ECVAM PS (39) (40) (21)*.
(2) (10) (12) (13)
(15) (16) (17)
(18) (20) (21)
(23) (33) (39)
(40)
EpiDerm™ SIT (EPI-200): A modification
of the original EpiDerm™ was validated
using the original ECVAM PS (21) in 2008
(2) (21) (22) (23)
(33)
3 SkinEthic™ RHE Validation study based on the original
ECVAM Performance Standards (21) in
2008.
(2) (21) (22) (23)
(31)
4 LabCyte EPI-
MODEL24 SIT
Validation study (2011-2012) based on
the Performance Standards (PS) of
OECD TG 439 (8) which are based on the
updated ECVAM PS (39) (40).
(24) (25) (26)
(27) (28) (35)
(39) (40) and PS
of this TG (8)
5 epiCS® Performance Standards based Validation
Study for SIT
according to OECD GD 220 (8)
following ESAC opinion in 2016 (45) and
independent peer review in 2018 (43)
(1) (8) (23) (39)
(40) (44) (43)
(45)
6 Skin+ ® Performance Based Validation Study for
SIT
according to OECD GD 220 (8)
following ECVAM opinion in 2016 (46) and
(1) (8) (23) (39)
(40) (42) (43)
(46)

-- 20 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
20
independent peer review in 2018 (43)
7 KeraSkinTM SIT Performance Standards based Validation
Study according to OECD GD 220 (8)
followed by independent peer-review in
2020.
(48) (49) (50)
(51)
Note: The original ECVAM Performance Standards (PS) (21) were developed in 2007 upon completion of the prospective validation study (16)
which had assessed the performance of test methods Nr 1 and 2 in reference to the classification system as described in the 28th amendment
to the EU Dangerous Substances Directive (41). In 2008 the UN GHS was introduced (1), effectively shifting the cut-off value for distinguishing
non-classified from classified substances from an in vivo score of 2.0 to 2.3. To adapt to this changed regulatory requirement, the accuracy
values and reference chemical list of the ECVAM PS were updated in 2009 (2) (39) (40). As the original PS, also the updated PS were largely
based data from methods Nr. 1 and 2 (16), but additionally used data on reference chemicals from method Nr. 3. In 2010, the updated ECVAM
PS were used for stipulating the PS related to this TG (8). For the purpose of this TG, EpiSkin™ is considered the VRM, due to the fact that it
was used to develop all the criteria of the PS. Detailed information on the validation studies, a compilation of the data generated as well as
background to the necessary adaptations of the PS as a consequence of the UN GHS implementation can be found in the ECVAM/BfR
explanatory background document to this OECD TG (23).
SIT: Skin Irritation Test
RHE: Reconstructed Human Epidermis

-- 21 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
21
ANNEX 3 - PROTOCOL PARAMETERS SPECIFIC TO EACH OF THE TEST METHODS INCLUDED IN THIS TG
Table 2- Overview of protocol parameters for each test method included in this TG
The RhE methods do show very similar protocols and notably all use a post-incubation period of 42 hours at 37°C (32) (33) (34) (35)
(42) (44) (48). Variations concern mainly three parameters relating to the different barrier functions of the test methods and listed
here: A) pre-incubation time and volume, B) Application of test chemicals and C) Post-incubation volume.
EpiSkinTM
(SM)
(23)
(No longer
commercially
available)
EpiDermTM
SIT (EPI-200)
(23)
SkinEthic
RHETM
(23)
LabCyte
EPI-MODEL24
SIT
(26)
epiCS®
(43)(44)
Skin+ ®
(42)(43)
KeraSkinTM
SIT
(48)
A) Pre-incubation
Incubation time 18- 24 hours 18-24 hours ≥ 2 hours 15-30 hours 4 hours or.
overnight
2 hours or
overnight
20-24 hours
Medium volume 2 mL 0.9 mL 0.3 or 1 mL 0.5 mL 1 mL 1 mL 0.9 mL
B) Test chemical application
For liquids 10 μL
(26 μL/cm2)
30 μL
(47 μL/cm2)
16 μL
(32 μL/cm2)
25 μL
(83 μL/cm2)
30 μL
(50 μL/cm²)
16 μL
(32 μL/cm²)
40 μL
(67 μL/cm²)
For solids
10 mg
(26 mg/cm2)
+ DW (5 μL)
25 mg*
(39 mg/cm2)
+ DPBS (25
μL)
16 mg
(32 mg/cm2)
+ DW (10 μL)
25 mg
(83 mg/cm2)
+ DW (25 μL)
30 mg
(50
mg/cm²)
+ DPBS
(50 μl)
16 mg
(32
mg/cm²)
+ DW
(10 μL)
40 mg
(67 mg/cm2)
+ DPBS (40
μL)
Use of nylon mesh Not used If necessary Applied Not used Applied Applied Not used
Total application time 15 minutes 60 minutes 42 minutes 15 minutes 20 minutes 42 minutes 30 minutes
Application temperature RT a) at RT for 25 RT RT RT RT

-- 22 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
22
minutes
b) at 37ºC for
35 minutes
37ºC
C) Post-incubation volume
Medium volume 2 mL 0.9 mL x 2 2 mL 1 mL 1 mL 2 mL 0.9 mL
MTT solution 2 mL 0.3
mg/mL 300 μL 1 mg/mL 300 μL 1
mg/mL
500 μL 0.5
mg/mL
300 μL 1
mg/mL
300 μL 0.5
mg/mL
300 μL 0.4
mg/mL
D) Acceptability Criteria
Mean OD of the tissue
replicates treated with
the negative control
(water or DPBS)
≥ 0.6 and ≤
1.5 ≥ 0.8 and ≤ 2.8 ≥ 0.8 and ≤ 3 ≥ 0.7 and ≤ 2.5 ≥ 0.8 and ≤
2.8
≥ 0.8 and ≤
2.5
≥ 0.7 and ≤
1.6
Mean viability of the
tissue replicates treated
with the positive control
(SDS 5%), expressed as
% of the negative control
< 40% < 20% < 40% < 40% < 20 % < 40% ≤ 40%
Standard deviation
between tissue replicates SD  18% SD  18% SD  18% SD  18% SD ≤ 18% SD ≤ 18% SD ≤ 18%
RT: Room temperature (18 – 25°C)
DW: distilled water
DPBS: Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffer Saline
*Quantity is measured with a calibrated spoon, as described in the SOP

-- 23 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
23
Table 3- Indicative ranges of cell viability values (%) obtained for each test method and proficiency substance
These values are provided for information purposes and reflect the ranges obtained by laboratories participating in the validation
study of individual methods. These ranges are not part of the TG, but can be useful for a laboratory setting up the method for the first
time before routine use for regulatory purposes.
EpiSkinTM (SM)
(23)
(No longer
commercially
available)
EpiDermTM
SIT (EPI-200)
(23)
SkinEthic
RHETM
(23)
LabCyte EPI-
MODEL24 SIT
(26)
epiCS®
(43)(44)
Skin+ ®
(42)(43)
KeraSkinTM SIT
(51)
NON-CLASSIFIED SUBSTANCES (UN GHS No Category)
naphthalene
acetic acid 92.3 +/-5.2 100.7 +/-8.4 104.0 +/-
12.9 100.4 +/-7.6 99.3 +/-
10.4 94.6 +/-17.9 81.8 +/-15.0
isopropanol 88.1 +/-8.7 65.6 +/-16.5 101.0 +/-11.3 76.7 +/-7.0 97 +/-6.8 90.7 +/-27.5 76.6 +/-9.4
methyl stearate 98.5 +/-11.3 107.7 +/-4.9 104.4 +/-15.8 99.3 +/-10.4 101 +/-8.0 101.7 +/-6.5 93.4 +/-11.3
heptyl butyrate 102 +/-4.2 104.1 +/-4.2 92.1 +/-17.5 105.4 +/-11.1 100.3 +/-
5.1 79 +/-17.8 87.3 +/-11.9
hexyl salicylate 89 +/-1.8 106.9 +/-5.2 95.9 +/-12.5 100.9 +/-8.2 95 +/-8.0 89.1 +/-16.3 88.3 +/-10.4
CLASSIFIED SUBSTANCES (UN GHS Category 2)
cyclamen
aldehyde 25.4 +/-12.1 18.5 +/-16.2 1.7 +/- 0.9 9.1 +/-2.9 12.8 +/-
26.4 3 +/-0.4 1.7 +/-3.0
1-bromohexane 24.4 +/-15.9 16.9 +/-2.5 1.3 +/-3.9 15.7 +/-3.4 10.4 +/-4.8 5.6 +/-0.7 18.9 +/-12.9
potassium
hydroxide (5%
aq.)
9.3+/-10.0 4.3 +/-1 16,7 +/-17 3.3 +/-3.1 2.6 +/-3.6 5.2 +/-1.5 -1.2 +/-2.01
1 The negative value indicates mean cell viability close to the detection limit and variation in the data.

-- 24 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
24
1-methyl-3-
phenyl-1-
piperazine
23.8+/-17.8 7.35 +/-2.7 8,2 +/-7.1 5.8 +/-3.7 38.8 +/-
37.9 4.5 +/-0.7 5.4 +/-9.5
heptanal 16.6+/-13.6 5.1 +/-0.3 1.3 +/-0.9 9.9 +/-1.3 4.4 +/-4.9 9.3 +/-0.2 2.8 +/-2.8

-- 25 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
25
Table 4. Acceptability ranges for negative control OD values in the MTT
assay of the test methods included in this TG
Lower acceptance limit Upper acceptance limit
EpiSkinTM (SM)(*) ≥ 0.6 ≤ 1.5
EpiDerm™ SIT (EPI-200) ≥ 0.8 ≤ 2.8
SkinEthic™ RHE ≥ 0.8 ≤ 3.0
LabCyte EPI-MODEL24 SIT ≥ 0.7 ≤ 2.5
epiCS® ≥ 0.8 ≤ 2.8
Skin+ ® ≥ 0.8 ≤ 2.5
KeraSkinTM SIT ≥ 0.7 ≤ 1.6
(*): the EpiSkinTM method is no longer commercially available from December 2024.
Table 5. QC batch release criteria of the test methods included in this TG
Lower acceptance
limit
Upper acceptance
limit
EpiSkinTM (SM) (*)
(18 hours treatment with SDS)
(32)
IC50 = 1.0 mg/mL IC50 = 3.0 mg/mL
EpiDerm™ SIT (EPI-200)
(1% Triton X-100) (33)
ET50 = 4.0 hr ET50 = 8.7 hr
SkinEthic™ RHE
(1% Triton X-100) (34)
ET50 = 4.0 hr ET50 = 10.0 hr
LabCyte EPI-MODEL24 SIT
(18 hours treatment with SDS)
(35)
IC50 = 1.4 mg/mL IC50 = 4.0 mg/mL
epiCS®
(1% Triton X-100) (44)
ET50 = 2.0 hr ET50 = 7.0 hr
Skin+ ®
(1% Triton X-100) (42)
ET50 = 4.0 hr ET50 = 9.0 hr
KeraSkinTM SIT
(18 hours treatment with SDS)
(48)
IC50 = 1.5 mg/mL IC50 = 4.8 mg/mL
(*): the EpiSkinTM method is no longer commercially available from December 2024.

-- 26 of 27 --

OECD/OCDE 439
© OECD (2025)
26
ANNEX 4 - Key parameters and acceptance criteria for qualification of an
HPLC/UPLC-spectrophotometry system for measurement of MTT formazan
extracted from RhE tissues
Parameter Protocol Derived from FDA Guidance
(36) (37)
Acceptance
Criteria
Selectivity Analysis of isopropanol, living blank
(isopropanol extract from living RhE
tissues without any treatment), dead
blank (isopropanol extract from killed
RhE tissues without any treatment)
Areainterference =
20% of AreaLLOQ1
Precision Quality Controls (i.e., MTT formazan at
1.6 μg/mL, 16 μg/mL and 160 μg/mL)
in isopropanol (n=5)
CV = 15% or =
20% for the LLOQ
Accuracy Quality Controls in isopropanol (n=5) %Dev = 15% or =
20% for LLOQ
Matrix Effect Quality Controls in living blank (n=5) 85% = Matrix
Effect % = 115%
Carryover Analysis of isopropanol after an ULOQ2
standard
Areainterference =
20% of AreaLLOQ
Reproducibility (intra-
day)
3 independent calibration curves
(based on 6 consecutive 1/3 dilutions
of MTT formazan in isopropanol
starting at ULOQ, i.e., 200 μg/mL);
Quality Controls in isopropanol (n=5)
Calibration
Curves: %Dev =
15% or = 20% for
LLOQ
Quality Controls:
%Dev = 15% and
CV = 15%
Reproducibility (inter-
day)
Day 1: 1 calibration curve and Quality
Controls in isopropanol (n=3)
Day 2: 1 calibration curve and Quality
Controls in isopropanol (n=3)
Day 3: 1 calibration curve and Quality
Controls in isopropanol (n=3)
Short Term Stability of
MTT Formazan in RhE
Tissue Extract
Quality Controls in living blank (n='3)'
analysed the day of the preparation
and after 24 hours of storage at room
temperature (18 – 25°C)
%Dev = 15%
Long Term Stability of
MTT Formazan in RhE
Tissue Extract, if
required
Quality Controls in living blank (n='3)'
analysed the day of the preparation
and after several days of storage at a
specified temperature (e.g., 4ºC, -20ºC,
-80ºC)
%Dev = 15%
Notes:
1LLOQ: Lower Limit of Quantification, defined to cover 1-2% tissue viability, i.e., 0.8 μg/mL.
2ULOQ: Upper Limit of Quantification, defined to be at least two times higher than the highest expected MTT formazan concentration in
isopropanol extracts from negative controls i.e., 200 μg/mL.

-- 27 of 27 --

