[SOURCE URL] https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/1995/07/test-no-421-reproduction-developmental-toxicity-screening-test_g1gh294b/9789264070967-en.pdf
[CHARS] 24288

421
Adopted:
27.07.95
OECD GUIDELINE FOR TESTING OF CHEMICALS
Adopted by the Council on 27th July 1995
Reproduction/Developmental Toxicity Screening Test
INTRODUCTION
1. 	In London, January 1990, an ad hoc Meeting of Experts on Screening Methods for
Reproductive Toxicity discussed and agreed on a protocol for a "Preliminary Reproduction Toxicity
Screening Test", that could effectively be utilised in the initial evaluation of existing chemicals (1).
2. 	This screening Test Guideline, which is an updated version of the protocol agreed at the
London meeting, is the outcome of a Nominated Experts Meeting on Reproductive Toxicity Screening
Methods, held in Tokyo, October 1992 (2). 	It is based on experience gained in Member countries
from using the original method on existing high production volume chemicals and in exploratory tests
with positive control chemicals.
3. 	This Guideline is designed to generate limited information concerning the effects of a test
substance on male and female reproductive performance such as gonadal function, mating behaviour,
conception, development of the conceptus and parturition. 	It is not an alternative to, nor does it
replace the existing Test Guidelines 414, 415 and 416.
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS
4. 	This Screening Test Guideline can be used to provide initial information on possible effects
on reproduction and/or development, either at an early stage of assessing the toxicological properties
of chemicals, or on chemicals of concern. It can also be used as part of a set of initial screening tests
for existing chemicals for which little or no toxicological information is available, as a dose range
finding study for more extensive reproduction/developmental studies, or when otherwise considered
relevant.
5. 	This test does not provide complete information on all aspects of reproduction and
development. In particular, it offers only limited means of detecting post-natal manifestations of pre-
natal exposure, or effects that may be induced during post-natal exposure. Due (amongst other reasons)
to the relatively small numbers of animals in the dose groups, the selectivity of the end points, and
the short duration of the study, this method will not provide evidence for definite claims of no effects.
Although, as a consequence, negative data do not indicate absolute safety with respect to reproduction
and development, this information may provide some reassurance if actual exposures were clearly less
than the dose related to the No-Observed-Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL). Moreover, in the absence
of data from other reproduction/developmental toxicity tests, positive results are useful for initial
hazard assessment and contribute to decisions with respect to the necessity and timing of additional
testing.
1/10

-- 1 of 10 --

421 	OCDE/OECD
6. 	This Guideline assumes oral administration of the test substance. 	Modifications may be
required if other routes of exposure are used.
7. 	Definitions used are given in Annex 1.
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST
8. 	The test substance is administered in graduated doses to several groups of males and females.
Males should be dosed for a minimum of four weeks and up to and including the day before scheduled
kill (this includes a minimum of two weeks prior to mating, during the mating period and,
approximately, two weeks post-mating). 	In view of the limited pre-mating dosing period in males,
fertility may not be a particular sensitive indicator of testicular toxicity. 	Therefore, a detailed
histological examination of the testes is essential. The combination of a pre-mating dosing period of
two weeks and subsequent mating/fertility observations with an overall dosing period of at least four
weeks, followed by detailed histopathology of the male gonads, is considered sufficient to enable
detection of the majority of effects on male fertility and spermatogenesis.
9. 	Females should be dosed throughout the study. 	This includes two weeks prior to mating
(with the objective of covering at least two complete oestrous cycles), the variable time to conception,
the duration of pregnancy and at least four days after delivery, up to and including the day before
scheduled kill.
10. 	Duration of study, following acclimatisation, is dependent on the female performance and
is approximately 54 days, [at least 14 days premating, (up to) 14 days mating, 22 days gestation, 4
days lactation].
11. 	During the period of administration, the animals are observed closely each day for signs of
toxicity. Animals which die or are killed during the test period are necropsied and, at the conclusion
of the test, surviving animals are killed and necropsied.
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD
Selection of animal species
12. 	This Test Guideline is designed for use with the rat. If other species are used, appropriate
modifications will be necessary. 	Strains with low fecundity or well-known high incidence of
developmental defects should not be used. 	Healthy virgin animals, not subjected to previous
experimental procedures, should be used. 	The test animals should be characterised as to species,
strain, sex, weight and/or age. 	At the commencement of the study the weight variation of animals
used should be minimal and not exceed 20% of the mean weight of each sex.
Housing and feeding conditions
13. 	The temperature in the experimental animal room should be 22 °C (± 3°). 	Although the
relative humidity should be at least 30% and preferably not exceed 70% other than during room
cleaning, the aim should be 50-60%. Lighting should be artificial, the sequence being 12 hours light,
12 hours dark. For feeding, conventional laboratory diets may be used with an unlimited supply of
drinking water. The choice of diet may be influenced by the need to ensure a suitable admixture of
a test substance when administered by this method.
14. 	Animals may be housed individually or be caged in small groups of the same sex; for group
caging, no more than five animals should be housed per cage. Mating procedures should be carried
2/10

-- 2 of 10 --

OCDE/OECD 	421
out in cages suitable for the purpose. 	Pregnant females should be caged individually and provided
with nesting materials.
Preparation of the animals
15. 	Healthy young adult animals are randomly assigned to the control and treatment groups.
Cages should be arranged in such a way that possible effects due to cage placement are minimized.
The animals are uniquely identified and kept in their cages for at least five days prior to the start of
the study to allow for acclimatisation to the laboratory conditions.
Preparation of doses
16. 	It is recommended that the test substance be administered orally unless other routes of
administration are considered more appropriate. When the oral route is selected, the test compound
is usually administered by gavage; however, alternatively, test compounds may be administered via
the diet or drinking water.
17. 	Where necessary, the test substance is dissolved or suspended in a suitable vehicle. 	It is
recommended that, wherever possible, the use of an aqueous solution/suspension be considered first,
followed by consideration of a solution/emulsion in oil (e.g. corn oil) and then by possible solution
in other vehicles. For vehicles other than water the toxic characteristics of the vehicle must be known.
The stability of the test substance in the vehicle should be determined.
PROCEDURE
Number and sex of animals
18. 	It is recommended that each group be started with at least 10 animals of each sex. Except
in the case of marked toxic effects, it is expected that this will provide at least 8 pregnant females per
group which normally is the minimum acceptable number of pregnant females per group. 	The
objective is to produce enough pregnancies and offspring to assure a meaningful evaluation of the
potential of the substance to affect fertility, pregnancy, maternal and suckling behaviour, and growth
and development of the F 1 offspring from conception to day 4 post-partum.
Dosage
19. 	Generally, at least three test groups and a control group should be used. Dose levels may
be based on information from acute toxicity tests or on results from repeated dose studies. Except for
treatment with the test substance, animals in the control group should be handled in an identical
manner to the test group subjects. If a vehicle is used in administering the test substance, the control
group should receive the vehicle in the highest volume used.
20. 	Dose levels should be selected taking into account any existing toxicity and (toxico-) kinetic
data available for the test compound or related materials. 	The highest dose level should be chosen
with the aim of inducing toxic effects but not death or severe suffering. 	Thereafter, a descending
sequence of dose levels should be selected with a view to demonstrating any dosage related response
and no-observed-adverse effects (NOAEL) at the lowest dose level. 	Two to four fold intervals are
frequently optimal for setting the descending dose levels and addition of a fourth test group is often
preferable to using very large intervals (e.g. more than a factor of 10) between dosages.
3/10

-- 3 of 10 --

421 	OCDE/OECD
Limit test
21. 	If an oral study at one dose level of at least 1000 mg/kg body weight/day or, for dietary or
drinking water administration, an equivalent percentage in the diet, or drinking water using the
procedures described for this study, produces no observable toxic effects and if toxicity would not be
expected based upon data from structurally related compounds, then a full study using several dose
levels may not be considered necessary. The limit test applies except when human exposure indicates
the need for a higher oral dose level to be used. For other types of administration, such as inhalation
or dermal application, the physical chemical properties of the test substance often may dictate the
maximum attainable concentration.
Administration of doses
22. 	The animals are dosed with the test substance daily for seven days a week. When the test
substance is administered by gavage, this should be done in a single dose to the animals using a
stomach tube or a suitable intubation cannula. 	The maximum volume of liquid that can be
administered at one time depends on the size of the test animal. 	The volume should not exceed
1 ml/100 g body weight, except in the case of aqueous solutions where 2 ml/100 g body weight may
be used. Except for irritating or corrosive substances which will normally reveal exacerbated effects
with higher concentrations, variability in test volume should be minimised by adjusting the
concentration to ensure a constant volume at all dose levels.
23. 	For substances administered via the diet or drinking water, it is important to ensure that the
quantities of the test substance involved do not interfere with normal nutrition or water balance. When
the test substance is administered in the diet either a constant dietary concentration (ppm) or a constant
dose level in terms of the animals’ body weight may be used; the alternative used must be specified.
For a substance administered by gavage, the dose should be given at similar times each day, and
adjusted at least weekly to maintain a constant dose level in terms of animal body weight.
Experimental schedule
24. 	Dosing of both sexes should begin at least 2 weeks prior to mating, after they have been
acclimatised for at least five days. The study should be scheduled in such a way that mating begins
soon after the animals have attained full sexual maturity. This may vary slightly for different strains
of rats in different laboratories, e.g. Sprague Dawley rats 10 weeks of age, Wistar rats about 12 weeks
of age. Dams with offspring should be killed on day 4 post-partum, or shortly thereafter. The day
of birth (viz. when parturition is complete) is defined as day 0 post-partum. 	Females showing no-
evidence of copulation are killed 24-26 days after the last day of the mating period. 	Dosing is
continued in both sexes during the mating period. 	Males should further be dosed after the mating
period at least until the minimum total dosing period of 28 days has been completed. They are then
killed, or, alternatively, are retained and continued to be dosed for the possible conduction of a second
mating if considered appropriate.
25. 	Daily dosing of the parental females should continue throughout pregnancy and at least up
to, and including, day 3 post-partum or the day before sacrifice. For studies where the test substance
is administered by inhalation or by the dermal route, dosing should be continued at least up to, and
including, day 19 of gestation.
26. 	A diagram of the experimental schedule is given in Annex 2.
Mating procedure
27. 	Normally, 1:1 (one male to one female) matings should be used in this study. Exceptions
can arise in the case of occasional deaths of males. The female should be placed with the same male
4/10

-- 4 of 10 --

OCDE/OECD 	421
until pregnancy occurs or two weeks have elapsed. Each morning the females should be examined
for the presence of sperm or a vaginal plug. Day 0 of pregnancy is defined as the day a vaginal plug
or sperm is found. 	In case pairing is unsuccessful, re-mating of females with proven males of the
same group could be considered.
Observations
28. 	Throughout the test period, general clinical observations should be made at least once a day,
and more frequently when signs of toxicity are observed. They should be made preferably at the same
time(s) each day, considering the peak period of anticipated effects after dosing. Pertinent behavioural
changes, signs of difficult or prolonged parturition and all signs of toxicity, including mortality, should
be recorded. These records should include time of onset, degree and duration of toxicity signs.
29. 	The duration of gestation should be recorded and is calculated from day 0 of pregnancy.
Each litter should be examined as soon as possible after delivery to establish the number and sex of
pups, stillbirths, live births, runts (pups that are significantly smaller than corresponding control pups)
and the presence of gross abnormalities.
30. 	Live pups should be counted and sexed and litters weighed within 24 hours of parturition
(day 0 or 1 post-partum) and on day 4 post-partum. In addition to the observations on parent animals
(see paragraph 28), any abnormal behaviour of the offspring should be recorded.
Body weight and food/water consumption
31. 	Males and females should be weighed on the first day of dosing, at least weekly thereafter,
and at termination. During pregnancy, females should be weighed on days 0, 7, 14 and 20 and within
24 hours of parturition (day 0 or 1 post-partum) and day 4 post-partum. These observations should
be reported individually for each adult animal.
32. 	During pre-mating, pregnancy and lactation, food consumption should be measured at least
weekly. The measurement of food consumption during mating is optional. Water consumption during
these periods should also be measured when the test substance is administered via drinking water.
Pathology
Gross necropsy
33. 	At the time of sacrifice or death during the study, the adult animals should be examined
macroscopically for any abnormalities or pathological changes. 	Special attention should be paid to
the organs of the reproductive system. 	The number of implantation sites should be recorded. 	The
counting of corpora lutea is strongly recommended.
34. 	The testes and epididymides of all male adult animals should be weighed.
35. 	Dead pups and pups killed at day 4 post-partum, or shortly thereafter, should, at least, be
carefully examined externally for gross abnormalities.
36. 	The ovaries, testes, epididymides, accessory sex organs and all organs showing macroscopic
lesions of all adult animals should be preserved. Formalin fixation is not recommended for routine
examination of testes and epididymides. An acceptable method is the use of Bouin’s fixative for these
tissues.
5/10

-- 5 of 10 --

421 	OCDE/OECD
Histopathology
37. 	Detailed 	histological 	examination 	should 	be 	performed 	on 	the 	ovaries, 	testes 	and
epididymides (with special emphasis on stages of spermatogenesis and histopathology of interstitial
testicular cell structure) of the animals of the highest dose group and the control group. 	The other
preserved organs may be examined when necessary. Examinations should be extended to the animals
of other dosage groups when changes are seen in the highest dose group.
DATA AND REPORTING
Data
38. 	Individual animal data should be provided. Additionally, all data should be summarised in
tabular form, showing for each test group the number of animals at the start of the test, the number
of animals found dead during the test or killed for humane reasons, the time of any death or humane
kill, the number of fertile animals, the number of pregnant females, the number of animals showing
signs of toxicity, a description of the signs of toxicity observed, including time of onset, duration, and
severity of any toxic effects, the types of histopathological changes, and all relevant litter data. 	A
tabular 	summary 	report 	format 	that 	has 	proven 	to 	be 	very 	useful 	for 	the 	evaluation 	of
reproductive/developmental effect is given in Annex 3.
39. 	Due to the limited dimensions of the study, statistical analysis in the form of tests for
"significance" are of limited value for many endpoints, especially reproductive endpoints. If statistical
analyses are used then the method chosen should be appropriate for the distribution of the variable
examined, and be selected prior to the start of the study. Because of the small group size, the use of
historic control data (e.g. for litter size), where available, may also be useful as an aid to the
interpretation of the study.
Evaluation of results
40. 	The findings of this toxicity study should be evaluated in terms of the observed effects,
necropsy and microscopic findings. The evaluation will include the relationship between the dose of
the test substance and the presence or absence, incidence and severity of abnormalities, including
gross lesions, identified target organs, infertility, clinical abnormalities, affected reproductive and litter
performance, body weight changes, effects on mortality and any other toxic effects.
41. 	Because of the short period of treatment of the male, the histopathology of the testis and
epididymus must be considered along with the fertility data, when assessing male reproductive effects.
Test report
42. 	The test report must include the following information:
Test substance:
- 	physical nature and, where relevant, physicochemical properties;
- 	identification data.
Vehicle (if appropriate):
- 	justification for choice of vehicle if other than water.
6/10

-- 6 of 10 --

OCDE/OECD 	421
Test animals:
- 	species/strain used;
- 	number, age and sex of animals;
- 	source, housing conditions, diet, etc.;
- 	individual weights of animals at the start of the test.
Test conditions:
- 	rationale for dose level selection;
- 	details of test substance formulation/diet preparation, achieved concentrations,
stability and homogeneity of the preparation;
- 	details of the administration of the test substance;
- 	conversion from diet/drinking water test substance concentration (ppm) to the
actual dose (mg/kg body weight/day), if applicable;
- 	details of food and water quality.
Results:
- 	body weight/body weight changes;
- 	food consumption, and water consumption if available;
- 	toxic response data by sex and dose, including fertility, gestation, and any other
signs of toxicity;
- 	gestation length;
- 	toxic or other effects on reproduction, offspring, post-natal growth, etc.;
- 	nature, severity and duration of clinical observations (whether reversible or not);
- 	number of live births and post-implantation loss;
- 	number pups with grossly visible abnormalities, number of runts;
- 	time of death during the study or whether animals survived to termination;
- 	number of implantations, corpora lutea (recommended), litter size and litter
weights at the time of recording;
- 	body weight at sacrifice and organ weight data for the parental animals;
- 	necropsy findings;
- 	a detailed description of microscopic findings of the male genital tract and in
other tissues, when performed;
- 	absorption data (if available);
- 	statistical treatment of results, where appropriate.
Discussion of results.
Conclusions.
Interpretation of results
43. 	The study will provide evaluations of reproduction/developmental toxicity associated with
administration of repeated doses. 	It could provide an indication of the need to conduct further
investigations and provides guidance in the design of subsequent studies.
LITERATURE
(1) 	OECD, Paris (1990). Room Document No. 1 for the 14th Joint Meeting of the Chemicals
Group and Management Committee.
(2) 	OECD, Paris (1992). Chairman’s Report of the ad hoc Expert Meeting on Reproductive
Toxicity Screening Methods, Tokyo, 27th-29th October, 1992.
7/10

-- 7 of 10 --

421 	OCDE/OECD
ANNEX 1
DEFINITIONS
Reproduction toxicity represents harmful effects on the progeny and/or an impairment of male and
female reproductive functions or capacity.
Maternal toxicity: adverse effects on gravid females, occurring either specifically (direct effect) or
aspecifically (indirect effect).
Impairment of fertility represents disorders of male or female reproductive functions or capacity.
Developmental toxicity: the manifestation of reproductive toxicity, representing pre-, peri- post-natal,
structural, or functional disorders in the progeny.
Dose is the amount of test substance administered. Dose is expressed as weight (g, mg) as weight of
test substance per unit weight of test animal (e.g. mg/kg), or as constant dietary concentration (ppm).
Dosage is a general term comprising of dose, its frequency and the duration of dosing.
Evident toxicity is a general term describing clear signs of toxicity following administration of test
substance. These should be sufficient for hazard assessment and should be such that an increase in
the dose administered can be expected to result in the development of severe toxic signs and probable
mortality.
NOAEL is the abbreviation for no-observed-adverse effect level and is the highest dose level where
no adverse treatment-related findings are observed.
8/10

-- 8 of 10 --

ANNEX 2
OCDE/OECD 	421
9/10
DIAGRAM OF THE EXPERIMENTAL SCHEDULE INDICATING THE MAXIMUM STUDY DURATION,
BASED ON A FULL 14-DAY MATING PERIOD
MALES/SIRES
 
OPTIONAL EXTENDED
EXPOSURE
MALES
 
MALES
+
FEMALES
PREGNANT FEMALES
 
DAMS
FEMALES
 
PUPS
NON-PREGNANT FEMALES
Pre-mating
	(14 days)
 
Mating
(maximum 14 days)
 
Gestation
(approx. 22 days)
 
Lactation
1 
7 
14 
21 
28 
35 
42 
50 
54
Start of
 
Necropsy males/sires
 
Parturition
 
Day 4 post-partum
the study
 
(after a dosing period of at least 4 weeks)
 
Necropsy females
	and pups
	Necropsy males/sires
	(optional)
Dosing
 
Without dosing

-- 9 of 10 --

421 	OCDE/OECD
ANNEX 3
TABULAR SUMMARY REPORT OF EFFECTS ON REPRODUCTION/DEVELOPMENT
OBSERVATIONS 	VALUES
Dosage (units)....... 	0 (control) 	. . . 	. . . 	. . . 	. . .
Pairs started (N)
Females showing evidence of copulation (N)
Females achieving pregnancy (N)
Conceiving days 1 - 5 (N)
Conceiving days 6 - . . .(1) (N)
Pregnancy ≤ 21 days (N)
Pregnancy = 22 days (N)
Pregnancy ≥ 23 days (N)
Dams with live young born (N)
Dams with live young at day 4 pp (N)
Corpora lutea/dam (mean)
Implants/dam (mean)
Live pups/dam at birth (mean)
Live pups/dam at day 4 (mean)
Sex ratio (m/f) at birth (mean)
Sex ratio (m/f) at day 4 (mean)
Litter weight at birth (mean)
Litter weight at day 4 (mean)
Pup weight at birth (mean)
Pup weight at day 4 (mean)
ABNORMAL PUPS
Dams with 0
Dams with 1
Dams with ≥ 2
LOSS OF OFFSPRING
Pre-implantation (corpora lutea minus implantations)
Females with 0
Females with 1
Females with 2
Females with ≥ 3
Pre-natal/post-implantations (implantations minus live births)
Females with 0
Females with 1
Females with 2
Females with ≥ 3
Post-natal (live births minus alive at post-natal day 4)
Females with 0
Females with 1
Females with 2
Females with ≥ 3
(1) 	last day of the mating period
10/10

-- 10 of 10 --

