[SOURCE URL] https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2023/07/test-no-487-in-vitro-mammalian-cell-micronucleus-test_g1g6fb2a/9789264264861-en.pdf
[CHARS] 78185

Test Guideline No. 487
In Vitro Mammalian Cell Micronucleus Test
4 July 2023
OECD Guidelines for the
Testing of Chemicals
Section 4
Health effects

-- 1 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
Adopted:
19 July 2016
Corrected: 4 July 2023
© OECD, (2023)
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/
1
In Vitro Mammalian Cell Micronucleus Test
INTRODUCTION
1. 	The OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals are periodically reviewed in light of
scientific progress, changing regulatory needs and animal welfare considerations. The original Test
Guideline 487 was adopted in 2010; it has been revised in the context of an overall review of the OECD
Test Guidelines on genotoxicity and to reflect several years of experience with this test and the
interpretation of the data. This Test Guideline is part of a series of Test Guidelines on genetic toxicology.
A document that provides succinct information on genetic toxicology testing and an overview of the recent
changes that were made to these Test Guidelines has been developed (1).
2. 	The in vitro micronucleus (MNvit) test is a genotoxicity test for the detection of
micronuclei (MN) in the cytoplasm of interphase cells. Micronuclei may originate from acentric
chromosome fragments (i.e. lacking a centromere), or whole chromosomes that are unable to
migrate to the poles during the anaphase stage of cell division. Therefore the MNvit test is an in
vitro method that provides a comprehensive basis for investigating chromosome damaging
potential in vitro because both aneugens and clastogens can be detected (2) (3) in cells that have
undergone cell division during or after exposure to the test chemical (see paragraph 13 for more
details). Micronuclei represent damage that has been transmitted to daughter cells, whereas
chromosome aberrations scored in metaphase cells may not be transmitted. In either case, the
changes may not be compatible with cell survival.
3. 	This Test Guideline allows the use of protocols with and without the actin polymerisation
inhibitor cytochalasin B (cytoB). The addition of cytoB prior to mitosis results in cells that are
binucleate and therefore allows for the identification and analysis of micronuclei in only those
cells that have completed one mitosis (4) (5). This Test Guideline also allows for the use of
protocols without cytokinesis block, provided there is evidence that the cell population analysed
has undergone mitosis.
OECD GUIDELINE FOR THE TESTING OF
CHEMICALS

-- 2 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
2
4. 	In addition to using the MNvit test to identify substances that induce micronuclei, the
use of immunochemical labelling of kinetochores, or hybridisation with centromeric/telomeric
probes (fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH)), also can provide additional information on the
mechanisms of chromosome damage and micronucleus formation (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
(13) (14) (15) (16) (17). Those labelling and hybridisation procedures can be used when there is
an increase in micronucleus formation and the investigator wishes to determine if the increase
was the result of clastogenic and/or aneugenic events.
5. 	Because micronuclei in interphase cells can be assessed relatively objectively,
laboratory personnel need only determine the number of binucleate cells when cytoB is used and
the incidence of micronucleate cells in all cases. As a result, the slides can be scored relatively
quickly and analysis can be automated. This makes it practical to score thousands instead of
hundreds of cells per treatment, increasing the power of the test. Finally, as micronuclei may
arise from lagging chromosomes, there is the potential to detect aneuploidy-inducing agents that
are difficult to study in conventional chromosomal aberration tests, e.g. OECD Test Guideline
473 (18). However, the MNvit test as described in this Test Guideline does not allow for the
differentiation of substances inducing changes in chromosome number and/or ploidy from those
inducing clastogenicity without special techniques such as FISH mentioned under paragraph 4.
6. 	The MNvit test is robust and can be conducted in a variety of cell types, and in the
presence or absence of cytoB. There are extensive data to support the validity of the MNvit test
using various cell types (cultures of cell lines or primary cell cultures) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24)
(25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36). These include, in particular, the
international validation studies co-ordinated by the Société Française de Toxicologie Génétique
(SFTG) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) and the reports of the International Workshop on Genotoxicity
Testing (5) (17). The available data have also been re-evaluated in a weight-of-evidence
retrospective validation study by the European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods
(ECVAM) of the European Commission (EC), and the test method has been endorsed as
scientifically valid by the ECVAM Scientific Advisory Committee (ESAC) (37) (38) (39).
7. 	The mammalian cell MNvit test may employ cultures of cell lines or primary cell cultures,
of human or rodent origin. Because the background frequency of micronuclei will influence the
sensitivity of the test, it is recommended that cell types with a stable and defined background
frequency of micronucleus formation be used. The cells used are selected on the basis of their
ability to grow well in culture, stability of their karyotype (including chromosome number) and
spontaneous frequency of micronuclei (40). At the present time, the available data do not allow
firm recommendations to be made but suggest it is important, when evaluating chemical hazards
to consider the p53 status, genetic (karyotype) stability, DNA repair capacity and origin (rodent
versus human) of the cells chosen for testing. The users of this Test Guideline are thus
encouraged to consider the influence of these and other cell characteristics on the performance
of a cell line in detecting the induction of micronuclei, as knowledge evolves in this area.
8. 	Definitions used are provided in Annex 1.

-- 3 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
3
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
9. 	Tests conducted in vitro generally require the use of an exogenous source of metabolic
activation unless the cells are metabolically competent with respect to the test substances. The
exogenous metabolic activation system does not entirely mimic in vivo conditions. Care should
be taken to avoid conditions that could lead to artifactual positive results which do not reflect the
genotoxicity of the test chemicals. Such conditions include changes in pH (41) (42) (43) or
osmolality, interaction with the cell culture medium (44) (45) or excessive levels of cytotoxicity
see paragraph 29.
10. 	To analyse the induction of micronuclei, it is essential that mitosis has occurred in both treated
and untreated cultures. The most informative stage for scoring micronuclei is in cells that have completed
one mitosis during or after treatment with the test chemical. For Manufactured Nanomaterials, specific
adaptations of this Test Guideline are needed but they are not described in this Test Guideline.
11. 	Before use of the Test Guideline on a mixture for generating data for an intended
regulatory purpose, it should be considered whether, and if so why, it may provide adequate
results for that purpose. Such considerations are not needed, when there is a regulatory
requirement for testing of the mixture.
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST
12. 	Cell cultures of human or other mammalian origin are exposed to the test chemical both
with and without an exogenous source of metabolic activation unless cells with an adequate
metabolising capability are used (see paragraph19).
13. 	During or after exposure to the test chemical, the cells are grown for a period sufficient
to allow chromosome damage or other effects on cell cycle/cell division to lead to the formation
of micronuclei in interphase cells. For induction of aneuploidy, the test chemical should ordinarily
be present during mitosis. Harvested and stained interphase cells are analysed for the presence
of micronuclei. Ideally, micronuclei should only be scored in those cells that have completed
mitosis during exposure to the test chemical or during the post-treatment period, if one is used.
In cultures that have been treated with a cytokinesis blocker, this is easily achieved by scoring
only binucleate cells. In the absence of a cytokinesis blocker, it is important to demonstrate that
the cells analysed are likely to have undergone cell division, based on an increase in the cell
population, during or after exposure to the test chemical. For all protocols, it is important to
demonstrate that cell proliferation has occurred in both the control and treated cultures, and the
extent of test chemical-induced cytotoxicity should be assessed in all of the cultures that are
scored for micronuclei.
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD
Cells
14. 	Cultured primary human or other mammalian peripheral blood lymphocytes (7) (20) (46)
(47) and a number of rodent cell lines such as CHO, V79, CHL/IU, and L5178Y cells or human

-- 4 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
4
cell lines such as TK6 can be used (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (26) (27) (28) (29) (31) (33) (34) (35)
(36) (see paragraph 6). Other cell lines such as HT29 (48), Caco-2 (49), HepaRG (50) (51),
HepG2 cells (52) (53), A549 and primary Syrian Hamster Embryo cells (54) have been used for
micronucleus testing but at this time have not been extensively validated. Therefore the use of
those cell lines and types should be justified based on their demonstrated performance in the
test, as described in the Acceptability Criteria section. Cyto B was reported to potentially impact
L5178Y cell growth and therefore is not recommended with this cell line (23). When primary cell
are used, for animal welfare reasons, the use of cells from human origin should be considered
where feasible and sampled in accordance with the human ethical principles and regulations.
15. 	Human peripheral blood lymphocytes should be obtained from young (approximately
18-35 years of age), non-smoking individuals with no known illness or recent exposures to
genotoxic agents (e.g. chemicals, ionising radiation) 	at 	levels 	that 	would 	increase 	the
background incidence of micronucleate cells. This would ensure the background incidence of
micronucleate cells to be low and consistent. The baseline incidence of micronucleate cells
increases with age and this trend is more marked in females than in males (55). If cells from more
than one donor are pooled for use, the number of donors should be specified. It is necessary to
demonstrate that the cells have divided from the beginning of treatment with the test chemical to
cell sampling. Cell cultures are maintained in an exponential growth phase (cell lines) or
stimulated to divide (primary cultures of lymphocytes) to expose the cells at different stages of
the cell cycle, since the sensitivity of cell stages to the test substances may not be known. The
primary cells that need to be stimulated with mitogenic agents in order to divide are generally no
longer synchronised during exposure to the test chemical (e.g. human lymphocytes after a 48-
hour mitogenic stimulation). The use of synchronised cells during treatment with the test chemical
is not recommended, but can be acceptable if justified.
Media and culture conditions
16. 	Appropriate culture medium and incubation conditions (culture vessels, humidified
atmosphere of 5% CO 2 if appropriate, temperature of 37°C) should be used for maintaining
cultures. Cell lines should be checked routinely for the stability of the modal chromosome number
and the absence of Mycoplasma contamination, and cells should not be used if contaminated or
if the modal chromosome number has changed. The normal cell cycle time of cell lines or primary
cultures used in the testing laboratory should be established and should be consistent with the
published cell characteristics.
Preparation of cultures
17. 	Cell lines: cells are propagated from stock cultures, seeded in culture medium at a density such
that the cells in suspensions or in monolayers will continue to grow exponentially until harvest time (e.g.
confluence should be avoided for cells growing in monolayers).
18. 	Lymphocytes: whole blood treated with an anti-coagulant (e.g. heparin), or separated
lymphocytes, are cultured (e.g. for 48 hours for human lymphocytes) in the presence of a mitogen
(e.g. phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) for human lymphocytes) in order to induce cell division prior to
exposure to the test chemical and cytoB.

-- 5 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
5
Metabolic activation
19. 	Exogenous metabolising systems should be used when employing cells with inadequate
endogenous metabolic capacity. 	The most commonly used system that is recommended by
default, unless another system is justified is a co-factor-supplemented post-mitochondrial fraction
(S9) prepared from the livers of rodents (generally rats) treated with enzyme-inducing agents
such as Aroclor 1254 (56) (57) or a combination of phenobarbital and β-naphthoflavone (58) (59)
(60). The latter combination does not conflict with the Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants (61) and has been shown to be as effective as Aroclor 1254 for inducing
mixed-function oxidases (58) (59) (60). The S9 fraction typically is used at concentrations ranging
from 1 to 2% (v/v) but may be increased to 10% (v/v) in the final test medium. The use of products
that reduce the mitotic index, especially calcium complexing products (62), should be avoided
during treatment. The choice of type and concentration of exogenous metabolic activation system
or metabolic inducer employed may be influenced by the class of substances being tested.
Test chemical preparation
20. 	Solid test chemicals should be prepared in appropriate solvents and diluted, if appropriate, prior
to treatment of the cells. Liquid test chemicals may be added directly to the test system and/or diluted prior
to treatment of the test system. Gaseous or volatile test chemicals should be tested by appropriate
modifications to the standard protocols, such as treatment in sealed vessels (63) (64) (65). Preparations of
the test chemical should be made just prior to treatment unless stability data demonstrate the acceptability
of storage.
Test Conditions
Solvents
21. 	The solvent should be chosen to optimise the solubility of the test chemicals without
adversely impacting the conduct of the assay, i.e. changing cell growth, affecting integrity of the
test chemical, reacting with culture vessels, impairing the metabolic activation system. 	It is
recommended that, wherever possible, the use of an aqueous solvent (or culture medium)
should be considered first. Well established solvents are water or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
Generally organic solvents should not exceed 1% (v/v). If cytoB is dissolved in DMSO, the
total amount of organic solvent used for both the test chemical and cytoB should not exceed 1%
(v/v); otherwise, untreated controls should be used to ensure that the percentage of organic
solvent has no adverse effect. Aqueous solvents (saline or water) should not exceed 10% (v/v)
in the final treatment medium. If other than well-established solvents are used (e.g. ethanol or
acetone), their use should be supported by data indicating their compatibility with the test
chemical, the test system and their lack of genetic toxicity at the concentration used. In the
absence of that supporting data, it is important to include untreated controls (see Annex 1), as
well as solvent controls to demonstrate that no deleterious or chromosomal effects (e.g.
aneuploidy or clastogenicity) are induced by the chosen solvent.
Use of cytoB as a cytokinesis blocker
22. 	One of the most important considerations in the performance of the MNvit test is
ensuring that the cells being scored have completed mitosis during the treatment or the post-
treatment incubation period, if one is used. Micronucleus scoring, therefore, should be limited to
cells that have gone through mitosis during or after treatment. CytoB is the agent that has been

-- 6 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
6
most widely used to block cytokinesis because it inhibits actin assembly, and thus prevents
separation of daughter cells after mitosis, leading to the formation of binucleate cells (6) (66)
(67). 	The 	effect 	of 	the 	test 	chemical 	on 	cell 	proliferation 	kinetics 	can 	be 	measured
simultaneously, when cytoB is used. CytoB should be used as a cytokinesis blocker when human
lymphocytes are used because cell cycle times will be variable among donors and because not
all lymphocytes will respond to PHA stimulation. CytoB is not mandatory for other cell types if
it can be established they have undergone division as described in paragraph 27. Moreover
CytoB is not generally used when samples are evaluated for micronuclei using flow cytometric
methods.
23. 	The appropriate concentration of cytoB should be determined by the laboratory for each
cell type to achieve the optimal frequency of binucleate cells in the solvent control cultures and
should be shown to produce a good yield of binucleate cells for scoring. The appropriate
concentration of cytoB is usually between 3 and 6 μg/ml (19).
Measuring cell proliferation and cytotoxicity and choosing treatment concentrations
24. 	When determining the highest test chemical concentration, concentrations that have the
capability of producing artifactual positive responses, such as those producing excessive
cytotoxicity (see paragraph 29), precipitation in the culture medium (see paragraph 30), or
marked changes in pH or osmolality (see paragraph 9), should be avoided. If the test chemical
causes a marked change in the pH of the medium at the time of addition, the pH might be adjusted
by buffering the final treatment medium so as to avoid artifactual positive results and to maintain
appropriate culture conditions.
25. 	Measurements of cell proliferation are made to assure that sufficient treated cells have
undergone mitosis during the test and that the treatments are conducted at appropriate levels of
cytotoxicity (see paragraph 29). Cytotoxicity should be determined in the main experiment with
and without metabolic activation using an appropriate indication of cell death and growth (see
paragraphs 26 and 27). While the evaluation of cytotoxicity in an initial preliminary test may be
useful to better define the concentrations to be used in the main experiment, an initial test is not
mandatory. If performed, it should not replace the measurement of cytotoxicity in the main
experiment.
26. 	Treatment of cultures with cytoB and measurement of the relative frequencies of
mononucleate, binucleate, and multi-nucleate cells in the culture provides an accurate method
of quantifying the effect on cell proliferation (6), and ensures that only cells that divided during or
after treatment with the test chemical are microscopically scored. The cytokinesis-block
proliferation index (CBPI) (6) (27) (68) or the Replication Index (RI) from at least 500 cells per
culture (see Annex 2 for formulas) are the recommended parameters to estimate cytotoxicity of
a treatment by comparing values in the treated and control cultures. Assessment of other
indicators of cytotoxicity (e.g. cell integrity, apoptosis, necrosis, metaphase counting, cell cycle)
could provide useful information, but should not be used in place of CBPI or RI.
27. 	In studies without cytoB, it is necessary to demonstrate that the cells in culture have
divided, so that a substantial proportion of the cells scored have undergone division during or
following treatment with the test chemical, otherwise false negative responses may be produced.
The measurement of Relative Population Doubling (RPD) or Relative Increase in Cell Count
(RICC) are the recommended parameters to estimate cytotoxicity of a treatment (17) (68) (69)

-- 7 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
7
(70) (71) (see Annex 2 for formulas). At extended sampling times (e.g. treatment for 1.5-2 normal
cell cycle lengths and harvest after an additional 1.5-2 normal cell cycle lengths, leading to
sampling times longer than 3-4 normal cell cycle lengths in total as described in paragraphs 38
and 39), RPD might underestimate cytotoxicity (71). Under these circumstances RICC might be
a better measure or the evaluation of cytotoxicity after a 1.5-2 normal cell cycle lengths would be
a helpful estimate. Assessment of other markers for cytotoxicity (e.g. cell integrity, apoptosis,
necrosis, metaphase counting, Proliferation index (PI), cell cycle, nucleoplasmic bridges or
nuclear buds) could provide useful additional information, but should not be used in place of
either the RPD or RICC.
28. 	At least three test concentrations (not including the solvent and positive controls) that
meet the acceptability criteria (appropriate cytotoxicity, number of cells, etc) should be evaluated.
Whatever the types of cells (cell lines or primary cultures of lymphocytes) , either replicate or
single treated cultures may be used at each concentration tested. While the use of duplicate
cultures is advisable, single cultures are also acceptable provided that the same total number of
cells are scored for either single or duplicate cultures. The use of single cultures is particularly
relevant when more than 3 concentrations are assessed (see paragraphs 44-45). The results
obtained from the independent replicate cultures at a given concentration can be pooled for the
data analysis. For test chemicals demonstrating little or no cytotoxicity, concentration intervals of
approximately 2 to 3 fold will usually be appropriate. Where cytotoxicity occurs, the test
concentrations selected should cover a range from that producing cytotoxicity as described in
paragraph 29 and including concentrations at which there is moderate and little or no cytotoxicity.
Many test chemicals exhibit steep concentration response curves and in order to obtain data at
low and moderate cytotoxicity or to study the dose response relationship in detail, it will be
necessary to use more closely spaced concentrations and/or more than three concentrations
(single cultures or replicates) in particular in situations where a repeat experiment is required
(see paragraph 60).
29. 	If the maximum test concentration is based on cytotoxicity, the highest test concentration
should aim to achieve 55 ± 5% cytotoxicity using the recommended parameters to estimate
cytotoxicity (i.e. RICC and RPD for cell lines when cytoB is not used, and CBPI or RI when cytoB
is used). Percent cytotoxicity should be determined using the formulas in Annex 2 (72). Positive
results found only at the higher end of the above-mentioned cytotoxicity range should be
interpreted with caution (71).
30. 	For poorly soluble test chemicals that are not cytotoxic at concentrations lower than the
lowest insoluble concentration, the highest concentration analysed should produce turbidity or a
precipitate visible by eye or with the aid of an inverted microscope at the end of the treatment
with the test chemical. Even if cytotoxicity occurs above the lowest insoluble concentration, it is
advisable to test at only one concentration inducing turbidity or with visible precipitate because
artifactual effects may result from the precipitate. At the concentration producing a precipitate,
care should be taken to assure that the precipitate does not interfere with the conduct of the test
(e.g. staining or scoring). The determination of solubility in the culture medium prior to the
experiment may be useful.
31. 	If no precipitate or limiting cytotoxicity is observed, the highest test concentration should
correspond to 10 mM, 2 mg/mL or 2 μl/mL, whichever is the lowest (73) (74) (75). When the test
chemical is not of defined composition, e.g. substance of unknown or variable composition,
complex reaction products or biological materials (i.e. UVCBs) (76), environmental extracts, etc.,
the top concentration may need to be higher (e.g. 5 mg/ml) in the absence of sufficient

-- 8 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
8
cytotoxicity, to increase the concentration of each of the components. It should be noted however
that these requirements may differ for human pharmaceuticals (93).
Controls
32. 	Concurrent negative controls (see paragraph 21), consisting of solvent alone in the
treatment medium and processed in the same way as the treatment cultures, should be included
for every harvest time.
33. 	Concurrent positive controls are needed to demonstrate the ability of the laboratory to
identify clastogens and aneugens under the conditions of the test protocol used and the
effectiveness of the exogenous metabolic activation system (when applicable). Examples of
positive controls are given in Table 1 below. Alternative positive control substances can be used,
if justified.
34. 	At the present time, no aneugens are known that require metabolic activation for their
genotoxic activity (17). Because in vitro mammalian cell tests for genetic toxicity are sufficiently
standardised for the short-term treatments done concurrently with and without metabolic
activation using the same treatment duration, the use of positive controls may be confined to a
clastogen requiring metabolic activation. In this case a single clastogenic positive control
response will demonstrate both the activity of the metabolic activation system and the
responsiveness of the test system. However, long term treatment (without S9) should have its
own positive control, as the treatment duration will differ from the test using metabolic activation.
If a clastogen is selected as the single positive control for short-term treatment with and without
metabolic activation, an aneugen should be selected for the long-term treatment without
metabolic activation. Positive controls for both clastogenicity and aneugenicity should be used in
metabolically competent cells that do not require S9.
35. 	Each positive control should be used at one or more concentrations expected to give
reproducible and detectable increases over background in order to demonstrate the sensitivity of
the test system (i.e. the effects are clear but do not immediately reveal the identity of the coded
slides to the reader), and the response should not be compromised by cytotoxicity exceeding the
limits specified in this TG.
Table 1. Reference substances recommended for assessing laboratory proficiency and for the
selection of positive controls
Category 	Substance 	CASRN
1. Clastogens active without metabolic activation
Methyl
methanesulphonate 66-27-3
Mitomycin C 	50-07-7
4-Nitroquinoline-N-
Oxide 56-57-5
Cytosine arabinoside 	147-94-4
2. Clastogens requiring metabolic activation

-- 9 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
9
Benzo(a)pyrene 	50-32-8
Cyclophosphamide 	50-18-0
3. Aneugens
Colchicine 	64-86-8
Vinblastine 	143-67-9
PROCEDURE
Treatment Schedule
36. 	In order to maximise the probability of detecting an aneugen or clastogen acting at a
specific stage in the cell cycle, it is important that sufficient numbers of cells representing all of
the various stages of their cell cycles are treated with the test chemical. All treatments should
commence and end while the cells are growing exponentially and the cells should continue to
grow up to the time of sampling. The treatment schedule for cell lines and primary cell cultures
may, therefore, differ somewhat from that for lymphocytes which require mitogenic stimulation to
begin their cell cycle (17). For lymphocytes, the most efficient approach is to start the treatment
with the test chemical at 44-48 hours after PHA stimulation, when cells will be dividing
asynchronously (6).
37. 	Published data (19) indicate that most aneugens and clastogens will be detected by a
short term treatment period of 3 to 6 hours in the presence and absence of S9, followed by
removal of the test chemical and sampling at a time equivalent to about 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell
cycle lengths after the beginning of treatment (7).
38. 	However, for thorough evaluation, which would be needed to conclude a negative outcome, all
three following experimental conditions should be conducted using a short term treatment with and without
metabolic activation and long term treatment without metabolic activation (see paragraphs 56, 57 and 58):
• 	Cells should be exposed to the test chemical without metabolic activation for 3-6 hours, and
sampled at a time equivalent to about 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell cycle lengths after the beginning of
treatment (19),
• 	Cells should be exposed to the test chemical with metabolic activation for 3-6 hours, and sampled
at a time equivalent to about 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell cycle lengths after the beginning of treatment
(19),
• 	Cells should be continuously exposed without metabolic activation until sampling at a time
equivalent to about 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell cycle lengths.
In the event that any of the above experimental conditions lead to a positive response, it may not be
necessary to investigate any of the other treatment regimens.
If it is known or suspected that the test chemical affects the cell cycling time (e.g. when testing
nucleoside analogues), especially for p53 competent cells (35) (36) (77), sampling or recovery
times may be extended by up to a further 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell cycle lengths (i.e. total 3.0 to 4.0
cell cycle lengths after the beginning of short-term and long-term treatments). 	These options
address situations where there may be concern regarding possible interactions between the test
chemical and cytoB. When using extended sampling times (i.e. when total 3.0 to 4.0 cell cycle
lengths culture time), care should be taken to ensure that the cells are still actively dividing. For

-- 10 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
10
example, for lymphocytes exponential growth may be declining at 96 hours following stimulation
and monolayer cultures of cells may become confluent.
39. 	The suggested cell treatment schedules are summarised in Table 2. These general
treatment schedules may be modified (and should be justified) depending on the stability or
reactivity of the test chemical or the particular growth characteristics of the cells being used.
Table 2. Cell treatment and harvest times for the MNvit test
Lymphocytes, 	primary
cells 	and 	cell 	lines
treated with cytoB
+ S9
Short
treatment
Treat for 3-6 hours in the presence of S9;
remove the S9 and treatment medium;
add fresh medium and cytoB;
harvest 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell cycle lengths after the
beginning of treatment.
– S9
Short
treatment
Treat for 3-6 hours;
remove the treatment medium;
add fresh medium and cytoB;
harvest 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell cycle lengths after the
beginning of treatment.
– S9
Extended
treatment
Treat for 1.5 – 2 normal cell cycle lengths in the
presence of cytoB;
harvest at the end of the treatment period.
Cell lines treated without cytoB
(Identical to the treatment schedules outlined above with the exception that no cytoB is added)
40. 	For monolayer cultures, mitotic cells (identifiable as being round and detaching from the
surface) may be present at the end of the 3-6 hour treatment. Because these mitotic cells are
easily detached, they can be lost when the medium containing the test chemical is removed. If
there is evidence for a substantial increase in the number of mitotic cells compared with controls,
indicating likely mitotic arrest, then the cells should be collected by centrifugation and the cells
added 	back 	to 	the 	culture, 	to 	avoid 	losing 	cells 	that 	are 	in 	mitosis, 	and 	at 	risk 	for
micronuclei/chromosome aberration, at the time of harvest.
Cell harvest and slide preparation
41. 	Each culture should be harvested and processed separately. Cell preparation may
involve hypotonic treatment, but this step is not necessary if adequate cell spreading is otherwise
achieved. Different techniques can be used in slide preparation provided that high-quality cell
preparations for scoring are obtained. Cells with intact cell membrane and intact cytoplasm
should be retained to allow the detection of micronuclei and (in the cytokinesis-block method)
reliable identification of binucleate cells.

-- 11 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
11
42. 	The slides can be stained using various methods, such as Giemsa or fluorescent DNA
specific dyes. The use of appropriate fluorescent stains (e.g. acridine orange (78) or Hoechst
33258 plus pyronin-Y (79)) can eliminate some of the artifacts associated with using a non-DNA
specific stain. Anti-kinetochore antibodies, FISH with pancentromeric DNA probes, or primed in
situ 	labelling 	with 	pancentromere-specific 	primers, 	together 	with 	appropriate 	DNA
counterstaining, can be used to identify the contents (whole chromosomes will be stained while
acentric chromosome fragments will not) of micronuclei if mechanistic information of their
formation is of interest (16) (17). Other methods for differentiation between clastogens and
aneugens may be used if they have been shown to be effective and validated. For example, for
certain cell lines the measurements of sub-2N nuclei as hypodiploid events using techniques
such as image analysis, laser scanning cytometry or flow cytometry could also provide useful
information (80) (81) (82). Morphological observations of nuclei could also give indications of
possible aneuploidy. Moreover, a test for metaphase chromosome aberrations, preferably in the
same cell type and protocol with comparable sensitivity, could also be a useful way to determine
whether micronuclei are due to chromosome breakage (knowing that chromosome loss would
not be detected in the chromosome aberration test).
Analysis
43. 	All slides, including those of the solvent and the untreated (if used) and positive controls,
should be independently coded before the microscopic analysis of micronucleus frequencies.
Appropriate techniques should be used to control any bias or drift when using an automated
scoring system, for instance, flow cytometry, laser scanning cytometry or image analysis.
Regardless of the automated platform is used to enumerate micronuclei, CBPI, RI, RPD, or RICC
should be assessed concurrently.
44. 	In cytoB-treated cultures, micronucleus frequencies should be analysed in at least 2000
binucleate cells per concentration and control (83), equally divided among the replicates, if
replicates are used. In the case of single cultures per dose (see paragraph 28), at least 2000
binucleate cells per culture (83) should be scored in this single culture. If substantially fewer than
1000 binucleate cells per culture (for duplicate cultures), or 2000 (for single culture), are available
for scoring at each concentration, and if a significant increase in micronuclei is not detected, the
test should be repeated using more cells, or at less cytotoxic concentrations, whichever is
appropriate. Care should be taken not to score binucleate cells with irregular shapes or where
the two nuclei differ greatly in size. 	In addition, binucleate cells should not be confused with
poorly spread multi-nucleate cells. Cells containing more than two main nuclei should not be
analysed for micronuclei, as the baseline micronucleus frequency may be higher in these cells
(84). Scoring of mononucleate cells is acceptable if the test chemical is shown to interfere with
cytoB activity. A repeat test without CytoB might be useful in such cases. Scoring mononucleate
cells in addition to binucleate cells could provide useful information (85) (86), but is not
mandatory.
45. 	In cell lines tested without cytoB treatment, micronuclei should be scored in at least 2000
cells per test concentration and control (83), equally divided among the replicates, if replicates
are used. When single cultures per concentration are used (see paragraph 28), at least 2000
cells per culture should be scored in this single culture. If substantially fewer than 1000 cells per
culture (for duplicate cultures), or 2000 (for single culture), are available for scoring at each
concentration, and if a significant increase in micronuclei is not detected, the test should be
repeated using more cells, or at less cytotoxic concentrations, whichever is appropriate.

-- 12 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
12
46. 	When cytoB is used, a CBPI or an RI should be determined to assess cell proliferation
(see Annex 2) using at least 500 cells per culture. When treatments are performed in the absence
of cytoB, it is essential to provide evidence that the cells in culture have divided, as discussed in
paragraphs 24-28.
Proficiency of the laboratory
47. 	In order to establish sufficient experience with the assay prior to using it for routine testing, the
laboratory should have performed a series of experiments with reference positive substances acting via
different mechanisms (at least one with and one without metabolic activation, and one acting via an
aneugenic mechanism, and selected from the substances listed in Table 1) and various negative controls
(including untreated cultures and various solvents/vehicle). These positive and negative control responses
should be consistent with the literature. This is not applicable to laboratories that have experience, i.e. that
have an historical data base available as defined in paragraphs 49 to 52.
48. 	A selection of positive control substances (see Table 1) should be investigated with short
and long treatments in the absence of metabolic activation, and also with short treatment in the
presence of metabolic activation, in order to demonstrate proficiency to detect clastogenic and
aneugenic substances, determine the effectiveness of the metabolic activation system and
demonstrate the appropriateness of the scoring procedures (microscopic visual analysis, flow
cytometry, laser scanning cytometry or image analysis). A range of concentrations of the selected
substances should be chosen so as to give reproducible and concentration-related increases
above the background in order to demonstrate the sensitivity and dynamic range of the test
system.
Historical control data
49. 	The laboratory should establish:
- 	A historical positive control range and distribution,
- 	A historical negative (untreated, solvent) control range and distribution.
50. 	When first acquiring data for an historical negative control distribution, concurrent negative
controls should be consistent with published negative control data where they exist. As more experimental
data are added to the control distribution, concurrent negative controls should ideally be within the 95%
control limits of that distribution (87) (88). The laboratory’s historical negative control database, should
initially be built with a minimum of 10 experiments but would preferably consist of at least 20 experiments
conducted under comparable experimental conditions. Laboratories should use quality control methods,
such as control charts (e.g. C-charts or X-bar charts (88)), to identify how variable their positive and
negative control data are, and to show that the methodology is 'under control' in their laboratory (83).
Further recommendations on how to build and use the historical data (i.e. criteria for inclusion and
exclusion of data in historical data and the acceptability criteria for a given experiment) can be found in
the literature (87).
51. 	Any changes to the experimental protocol should be considered in terms of the
consistency of the data with the laboratory’s existing historical control databases. 	Any major
inconsistencies should result in the establishment of a new historical control database.
52. 	Negative control data should consist of the incidence of micronucleated cells from a
single culture or the sum of replicate cultures as described in paragraph 28. Concurrent negative

-- 13 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
13
controls should ideally be within the 95% control limits of the distribution of the laboratory’s
historical negative control database (87) (88). Where concurrent negative control data fall outside
the 95% control limits, they may be acceptable for inclusion in the historical control distribution
as long as these data are not extreme outliers and there is evidence that the test system is ‘under
control’ (see paragraph 50) and there is evidence of absence of technical or human failure.
DATA AND REPORTING
Presentation of the results
53. 	If the cytokinesis-block technique is used, only the frequencies of binucleate cells with
micronuclei (independent of the number of micronuclei per cell) are used in the evaluation of
micronucleus induction. The scoring of the numbers of cells with one, two, or more micronuclei
can be reported separately and could provide useful information, but is not mandatory.
54. 	Concurrent measures of cytotoxicity for all treated, negative and positive control cultures
should be determined (16). The CBPI or the RI should be calculated for all treated and control
cultures as measurements of cell cycle delay when the cytokinesis-block method is used. In the
absence of cytoB, the RPD or the RICC should be used (see Annex 2).
55. 	Individual culture data should be provided. Additionally, all data should be summarised
in tabular form.
Acceptability Criteria
56. 	Acceptance of a test is based on the following criteria:
• 	The concurrent negative control is considered acceptable for addition to the laboratory historical
negative control database as described in paragraph 50;
• 	Concurrent positive controls (see paragraph 50) should induce responses that are compatible with
those generated in the laboratory’s historical positive control data base and produce a statistically
significant increase compared with the concurrent negative control;
• 	Cell proliferation criteria in the solvent control should be fulfilled (paragraph 25-27);
• 	All experimental conditions were tested unless one resulted in positive results (paragraphs 36-40);
• 	Adequate number of cells and concentrations are analysable (paragraphs 28 and 44-46);
• 	The criteria for the selection of top concentration are consistent with those described in
paragraphs 24-31.

-- 14 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
14
Evaluation and interpretation of results
57. 	Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered to be
clearly positive if, in any of the experimental conditions examined (see paragraphs 36-39):
• 	at least one of the test concentrations exhibits a statistically significant increase compared
with the concurrent negative control (89);
• 	the increase is dose-related in at least one experimental condition when evaluated with
an appropriate trend test (see paragraph 28);
• 	any of the results are outside the distribution of the historical negative control data (e.g.
Poisson-based 95% control limits; see paragraph 52).
When all of these criteria are met, the test chemical is then considered able to induce
chromosome breaks and/or gain or loss in this test system. 	Recommendations for the most
appropriate statistical methods can also be found in the literature (90) (91) (92).
58. 	Providing that all acceptability criteria are fulfilled, a test chemical is considered clearly
negative if, in all experimental conditions examined (see paragraphs 36-39):
• 	none of the test concentrations exhibits a statistically significant increase compared with
the concurrent negative control;
• 	there is no concentration-related increase when evaluated with an appropriate trend test;
• 	all results are inside the distribution of the historical negative control data (e.g. Poisson-
based 95% control limits; see paragraph 52).
The test chemical is then considered unable to induce chromosome breaks and/or gain or loss
in this test system. Recommendations for the most appropriate statistical methods can also be
found in the literature (90) (91) (92).
59. 	There is no requirement for verification of a clear positive or negative response.
60. 	In case the response is neither clearly negative or clearly positive as described above
and/or in order to assist in establishing the biological relevance of a result, the data should be
evaluated by expert judgement and/or further investigations. Scoring additional cells (where
appropriate) or performing a repeat experiment possibly using modified experimental conditions
(e.g. concentration spacing, other metabolic activation conditions [i.e. S9 concentration or S9
origin]) could be useful.
61. 	In rare cases, even after further investigations, the data set will not allow a conclusion
of positive or negative, and will therefore be concluded as equivocal.
62. 	Test chemicals that induce micronuclei in the MNvit test may do so because they induce
chromosome breakage, chromosome loss, or a combination of the two. Further analysis using
anti-kinetochore antibodies, centromere specific in situ probes, or other methods may be used to
determine whether the mechanism of micronucleus induction is due to clastogenic and/or
aneugenic activity.

-- 15 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
15
Test Report
63. 	The test report should include the following information:
Test chemical:
- source, lot number, limit date for use, if available;
- stability of the test chemical itself, if known;
- reactivity of the test chemicals with the solvent/vehicle or cell culture media;
- solubility and stability of the test chemical in solvent, if known;
- measurement of pH, osmolality, and precipitate in the culture medium to which the
test chemical was added, as appropriate.
Mono-constituent substance:
- physical appearance, water solubility, and additional relevant physicochemical properties;
- chemical identification, such as IUPAC or CAS name, CAS number, SMILES or InChI
code, structural formula, purity, chemical identity of impurities as appropriate and practically
feasible, etc.
Multi-constituent substance, UVBCs and mixtures:
- characterised as far as possible by chemical identity (see above), quantitative
occurrence and relevant physicochemical properties of the constituents.
Solvent:
- justification for choice of solvent;
- percentage of solvent in the final culture medium
Cells:
- type and source of cells used;
- suitability of the cell type used;
- absence of mycoplasma, in case of cell lines;
- for cell lines, information on cell cycle length or proliferation index;
- where lymphocytes are used, sex of blood donors, age and any relevant information
on the donor, whole blood or separated lymphocytes, mitogen used;
- normal (negative control) cell cycle time;
- number of passages, if available, for cell lines;
- methods for the maintenance of cell cultures, for cell lines;
- modal number of chromosomes, for cell lines;
Test Conditions:
- identity of the cytokinesis blocking substance (e.g. cytoB), if used, and its
concentration and duration of cell exposure;
- concentration of the test chemical expressed as a final concentration the culture
medium (e.g. μg or mg/mL, or mM of culture medium);
- rationale for the selection of concentrations and the number of cultures, including
cytotoxicity data and solubility limitations;
- composition of media, CO 2 concentration, if applicable, humidity level;
- concentration (and/or volume) of the solvent and test chemical added in the culture

-- 16 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
16
medium;
- incubation temperature and time;
- duration of treatment;
- harvest time after treatment;
- cell density at seeding, if applicable;
- type and composition of metabolic activation system, (source of S9, method of
preparation of the S9 mix, the concentration or volume of S9 mix and S9 in the final
culture medium, quality controls of S9 (e.g. enzymatic activity, sterility, metabolic
capability);
- positive and negative control substances, final concentrations, conditions and
durations of treatment and recovery periods;
- methods of slide preparation and the staining technique used;
- 	criteria 	for 	scoring 	micronucleate 	cells 	(selection 	of 	analysable 	cells 	and
identification of micronucleus);
- numbers of cells analysed;
- methods for the measurements of cytotoxicity;
- any supplementary information relevant to cytotoxicity and method used;
- criteria for considering studies as positive, negative, or equivocal;
- method(s) of statistical analysis used;
- methods, such as use of kinetochore antibody or pan-centromeric specific probes,
to characterise whether micronuclei contain whole or fragmented chromosomes, if
applicable;
- methods used to determine pH, osmolality and precipitation.
Results:
- 	definition of acceptable cells for analysis;
- 	in the absence of cyto B, the number of cells treated and the number of cells
harvested for each culture in case of cell lines;
- 	parameters to estimate cytotoxicity, e.g. CBPI or RI in the case of cytokinesis-
block method; RICC or RPD when cytokinesis-block methods are not used; other
observations if any (e.g. cell confluency, apoptosis, necrosis, metaphase counting,
frequency of binucleated cells);
- 	signs of precipitation and time of the determination;
- 	data on pH and osmolality of the treatment medium, if determined;
- 	distribution of mono-, bi-, and multi-nucleate cells if a cytokinesis block method is
used;
- 	number of cells with micronuclei given separately for each treated and control
culture, and defining whether from binucleate or mononucleate cells, where
appropriate;
- 	concentration-response relationship, where possible;
- 	concurrent negative (solvent) and positive control data (concentrations and
solvents);
- 	historical negative (solvent) and positive control data, with ranges, means and
standard deviation and 95% control limits for the distribution, as well as the
number of data;
- 	statistical analysis; p-values if any.
Discussion of the results.

-- 17 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
17
Conclusions.

-- 18 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
18
LITERATURE
(1) OECD (2016). Overview of the set of OECD Genetic Toxicology Test Guidelines and
updates performed in 2014-2015. ENV Publications. Series on Testing and Assessment,
No. 234, OECD, Paris.
(2) Kirsch-Volders, M. (1997), Towards a validation of the micronucleus test, Mutation
Research, Vol. 392/1-2, pp. 1-4.
(3) Parry, J.M., A. Sors (1993), The detection and assessment of the aneugenic potential of
environmental 	chemicals: 	the 	European 	Community 	aneuploidy 	project, 	Mutation
Research, Vol. 287/1, pp. 3-15.
(4) Fenech, M., A.A. Morley (1985), Solutions to the kinetic problem in the micronucleus
assay, Cytobios, Vol. 43/172-173, pp. 233-246.
(5) Kirsch-Volders, M. et al. (2000), Report from the In Vitro Micronucleus Assay Working
Group, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 35/3, pp. 167-172.
(6) Fenech, M. (2007), Cytokinesis-block micronucleus cytome assay, Nature Protocols, Vol.
2/5, pp. 1084-1104.
(7) Fenech, M., A.A. Morley (1986), Cytokinesis-block micronucleus method in human
lymphocytes: effect of in-vivo ageing and low dose X-irradiation, Mutation Research, Vol.
161/2, pp. 193-198.
(8) Eastmond, D.A., J.D. Tucker (1989), Identification of aneuploidy-inducing agents using
cytokinesis-blocked human lymphocytes and an antikinetochore antibody, Environmental
and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 13/1, pp. 34-43.
(9) Eastmond, D.A., D. Pinkel (1990), Detection of aneuploidy and aneuploidy-inducing
agents in human lymphocytes using fluorescence in-situ hybridisation with chromosome-
specific DNA probes, Mutation Research, Vol. 234/5, pp. 9-20.
(10) 	Miller, B.M. et al. (1991), Classification of micronuclei in murine erythrocytes:
immunofluorescent staining using CREST antibodies compared to in situ hybridization
with biotinylated gamma satellite DNA, Mutagenesis, Vol. 6/4, pp. 297-302.
(11) 	Farooqi, Z., F. Darroudi, A. T. Natarajan (1993), The use of fluorescence in-situ
hybridisation for the detection of aneugens in cytokinesis-blocked mouse splenocytes,
Mutagenesis, Vol. 8/4, pp. 329-334.
(12) 	Migliore, L. et al. (1993), Cytogenetic damage induced in human lymphocytes by four
vanadium compounds and micronucleus analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization
with a centromeric probe, Mutation Research, Vol. 319/3, pp. 205-213.
(13) 	Norppa, H., L. Renzi, C. Lindholm (1993), Detection of whole chromosomes in
micronuclei of cytokinesis-blocked human lymphocytes by antikinetochore staining and
in situ hybridization, Mutagenesis, Vol. 8/6, pp. 519-525.

-- 19 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
19
(14) 	Eastmond, D.A, D.S. Rupa, L.S. Hasegawa (1994), Detection of hyperdiploidy and
chromosome breakage in interphase human lymphocytes following exposure to the
benzene metabolite hydroquinone using multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization with
DNA probes, Mutation Research, Vol. 322/1, pp. 9-20.
(15) 	Marshall, 	R.R. 	et 	al. 	(1996), 	Fluorescence 	in 	situ 	hybridisation 	(FISH) 	with
chromosome-specific centromeric probes: a sensitive method to detect aneuploidy,
Mutation Research, Vol. 372/2, pp. 233-245.
(16) 	Zijno, P. et al. (1996), Analysis of chromosome segregation by means of fluorescence
in situ hybridization: application to cytokinesis-blocked human lymphocytes, Mutation
Research, Vol. 372/2, 211-219.
(17) 	Kirsch-Volders et al. (2003), Report from the in vitro micronucleus assay working
group, Mutation Research, Vol. 540/2, pp. 153-163.
(18) 	OECD (1997), Test No. 473: In Vitro Mammalian Chromosome Aberration Test, OECD
Guidelines for Testing of Chemicals, Section 4, OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264071261-en.
(19) 	Lorge, E. et al. (2006), SFTG International collaborative Study on in vitro micronucleus
test. I. General conditions and overall conclusions of the study, Mutation Research, Vol.
607/1, pp. 13-36.
(20) 	Clare, G. et al. (2006), SFTG International collaborative study on the in vitro
micronucleus test. II. Using human lymphocytes, Mutation Research, Vol. 607/1, pp. 37-
60.
(21) 	Aardema, M.J. et al. (2006), SFTG International collaborative study on the in vitro
micronucleus test, III. Using CHO cells, Mutation Research, Vol. 607/1, pp. 61-87.
(22) 	Wakata, A. et al. (2006), SFTG International collaborative study on the in vitro
micronucleus test, IV. Using CHO/IU cells, Mutation Research, Vol. 607/1, pp. 88-124.
(23) 	Oliver, J. et al. (2006), SFTG International collaborative study on the in vitro
micronucleus test, V. Using L5178Y cells, Mutation Research, Vol. 607/1, pp. 125-152.
(24) 	Albertini, S. et al. (1997), Detailed data on in vitro MNT and in vitro CA: industrial
experience, Mutation Research, Vol. 392/1-2, pp. 187-208.
(25) 	Miller, B. et al. (1997), Comparative evaluation of the in vitro micronucleus test and the
in vitro chromosome aberration test: industrial experience, Mutation Research, Vol.
392/1-2, pp. 45-59.
(26) 	Miller, B. et al. (1998), Evaluation of the in vitro micronucleus test as an alternative to
the in vitro chromosomal aberration assay: position of the GUM Working Group on the in
vitro 	micronucleus 	test. 	Gesellschaft 	fur 	Umwelt-Mutations-forschung, 	Mutation
Research, Vol. 410, pp. 81-116.

-- 20 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
20
(27) 	Kalweit, S. et al. (1999), Chemically induced micronucleus formation in V79 cells –
comparison of three different test approaches, Mutation Research, Vol. 439/2, pp. 183-190.
(28) 	Kersten, B. et al. (1999), The application of the micronucleus test in Chinese hamster
V79 cells to detect drug-induced photogenotoxicity, Mutation Research, Vol. 445/1, pp.
55-71.
(29) 	von der Hude, W. et al. (2000), In vitro micronucleus assay with Chinese hamster V79
cells - results of a collaborative study with in situ exposure to 26 chemical substances,
Mutation Research, Vol. 468/2, pp. 137-163.
(30) 	Garriott, M.L., J.B. Phelps, W.P. Hoffman (2002), 	A protocol for the in vitro
micronucleus test, I. Contributions to the development of a protocol suitable for regulatory
submissions from an examination of 16 chemicals with different mechanisms of action
and different levels of activity, Mutation Research, Vol. 517/1-2 , pp. 123-134.
(31) 	Matsushima, T. et al. (1999), Validation study of the in vitro micronucleus test in a
Chinese hamster lung cell line (CHL/IU), Mutagenesis, Vol. 14/6, pp. 569-580.
(32) 	Elhajouji, A., E. Lorge (2006), Special Issue: SFTG International collaborative study on
in vitro micronucleus test, Mutation Research, Vol. 607/1, pp. 1-152.
(33) 	Kirkland, D. (2010), Evaluation of different cytotoxic and cytostatic measures for the in
vitromicronucleus test (MNVit): Introduction to the collaborative trial, Mutation Research,
Vol. 702/2, pp. 139-147.
(34) 	Hashimoto K. et al. (2011), Comparison of four different treatment conditions of
extended exposure in the in vitro micronucleus assay using TK6 lymphoblastoid cells,
Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, Vol. 59/1, pp. 28-36.
(35) 	Honma, M., M. Hayashi (2011), Comparison of in vitro micronucleus and gene
mutation assay results for p53-competent versus p53-deficient human lymphoblastoid
cells, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 52/5, pp. 373-384.
(36) 	Zhang, L.S. et al. (1995), A comparative study of TK6 human lymphoblastoid and
L5178Y mouse lymphoma cell lines in the in vitro micronucleus test, Mutation
Research Letters, Vol. 347/3-4, pp. 105-115.
(37) 	ECVAM (2006), Statement by the European Centre for the Validation of Alternative
Methods (ECVAM) Scientific Advisory Committee (ESAC) on the scientific validity of the
in vitro micronucleus test as an alternative to the in vitro chromosome aberration assay
for genotoxicity testing, ESAC 25th meeting, 16-17 November 2006, Available at:
http://ecvam.jrc.it/index.htm.
(38) 	ESAC 	(2006), 	ECVAM 	Scientific 	Advisory 	Committee 	(ESAC) 	Peer 	Review,
Retrospective Validation of the In Vitro Micronucleus Test, Summary and Conclusions of
the Peer Review Panel, Available at: http://ecvam.jrc.it/index.htm.

-- 21 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
21
(39) 	Corvi, R. et al. (2008), ECVAM Retrospective Validation of in vitro Micronucleus Test
(MNT), Mutagenesis, Vol 23/4, pp. 271-283.
(40) 	ILSI paper (draft), Lorge, E., M.M. Moore, J. Clements, M. O‘Donovan, M. Honma, A.
Kohara, J. van Benthem, S. Galloway, M.J. Armstrong, A. Sutter, V. Thybaud, B.
Gollapudi, 	M. 	Aardema, 	J. 	Young-Tannir. 	Standardized 	Cell 	Sources 	and
Recommendations for Good Cell Culture Practices in Genotoxicity Testing. Mutation
Research.
(41) 	Scott, D. et al. (1991), International Commission for Protection Against Environmental
Mutagens and Carcinogens, Genotoxicity under extreme culture conditions. A report from
ICPEMC Task Group 9, Mutation Research, Vol. 257/2, pp. 147-205.
(42) 	Morita, T. et al. (1992), Clastogenicity of low pH to various cultured mammalian cells,
Mutation Research, Vol. 268/2, pp. 297-305.
(43) 	Brusick, D. (1986), Genotoxic effects in cultured mammalian cells produced by low pH
treatment conditions and increased ion concentrations, Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol.
8/6, pp. 789-886.
(44) 	Long, L.H. et al. (2007), Different cytotoxic and clastogenic effects of epigallocatechin
gallate in various cell-culture media due to variable rates of its oxidation in the culture
medium, Mutation Research, Vol. 634/1-2, pp. 177-183.
(45) 	Nesslany, F. et al. (2008), Characterization of the Genotoxicity of Nitrilotriacetic Acid,
Environmental and Molecular Mutation., Vol. 49, pp. 439-452.
(46) 	Fenech, M., A.A. Morley (1985), Measurement of micronuclei in lymphocytes, Mutation
Research, Vol. 147/1-2, pp. 29-36.
(47) 	Fenech, 	M. 	(1997), 	The 	advantages 	and 	disadvantages 	of 	cytokinesis-blood
micronucleus method, Mutation Research, Vol. 392, pp. 11-18.
(48) 	Payne, C.M. et al. (2010), Hydrophobic bile acid-induced micronuclei formation, mitotic
perturbations, and decreases in spindle checkpoint proteins: relevance to genomic
instability in colon carcinogenesis, Nutrition and Cancer, Vol. 62/6, pp. 825-840.
(49) 	Bazin, E. et al. (2010), Genotoxicity of a Freshwater Cyanotoxin,Cylindrospermopsin,
in 	Two 	Human 	Cell 	Lines: 	Caco-2 	and 	HepaRG, 	Environmental 	and 	Molecular
Mutagenesis, Vol. 51/3, pp. 251-259.
(50) 	Le Hegarat, L. et al. (2010), Assessment of the genotoxic potential of indirect chemical
mutagens in HepaRG cellsby the comet and the cytokinesis-block micronucleus assays,
Mutagenesis, Vol. 25/6, pp. 555-560.
(51) 	Josse, R. et al. (2012), An adaptation of the human HepaRG cells to the in vitro
micronucleus assay, Mutagenesis, Vol. 27/3, pp. 295-304.
(52) 	Ehrlich, V. et al. (2002), Fumonisin B1 is genotoxic in human derived hepatoma
(HepG2) cells, Mutagenesis, Vol. 17/3, pp. 257-260.

-- 22 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
22
(53) 	Knasmüller, S. et al. (2004), Use of human-derived liver cell lines for the detection of
environmental and dietary genotoxicants; current state of knowledge, Toxicology, Vol.
198/1-3, pp. 315-328.
(54) 	Gibson, D.P. et al. (1997), Induction of micronuclei in Syrian hamster embryo cells:
comparison to results in the SHE cell transformation assay for National Toxicology
Program test chemicals, Mutation Research, Vol. 392/1-2 , pp. 61-70.
(55) 	Bonassi, S. et al. (2001), HUman MicroNucleus Project: international database
comparison 	for 	results 	with 	the 	cytokinesis-block 	micronucleus 	assay 	in 	human
lymphocytes, I. Effect of laboratory protocol, scoring criteria and host factors on the
frequency of micronuclei, Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 37/1, pp. 31-
45.
(56) 	Maron, D.M., B.N. Ames (1983), Revised methods for the Salmonella mutagenicity
test, Mutation Research, Vol. 113/3-4, pp. 173-215.
(57) 	Ong, T.-m. et al. (1980), Differential effects of 	cytochrome P450-inducers on
promutagen activation capabilities and enzymatic activities of S-9 from rat liver, Journal
of Environmental Pathology and Toxicology, Vol. 4/1, pp. 55-65.
(58) 	Elliott, 	B.M. et al. (1992), 	Alternatives to Aroclor 	1254-induced S9 in in-vitro
genotoxicity assays, Mutagenesis, Vol. 7, pp. 175-177.
(59) 	Matsushima, T. et al. (1976), “A safe substitute for Polychlorinated Biphenyls as an
Inducer of Metabolic Activation Systems”, in In Vitro Metabolic Activation in Mutagenesis
Testing, de Serres, F.J. et al. (eds), Elsevier, North-Holland, pp. 85-88.
(60) 	Johnson, T.E., D. R. Umbenhauer, S.M. Galloway (1996), Human liver S-9 metabolic
activation: proficiency in cytogenetic assays and comparison with phenobarbital/beta-
naphthoflavone 	or 	Aroclor 	1254 	induced 	rat 	S-9, 	Environmental 	and 	Molecular
Mutagenesis, Vol. 28, pp. 51-59.
(61) 	UNEP (2001), Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP). Available at: [http://www.pops.int/]
(62) 	Tucker, J.D., M.L. Christensen (1987), Effects of anticoagulants upon sister-chromatid
exchanges, cell-cycle kinetics, and mitotic index in human peripheral lymphocytes,
Mutation Research, Vol.190/3, pp. 225-8.
(63) 	Krahn, D.F., F.C. Barsky, K.T. McCooey (1982), “CHO/HGPRT Mutation Assay:
Evaluation of Gases and Volatile Liquids”, in Genotoxic Effects of Airborne Agents, Tice,
R.R., D.L. Costa, K.M. Schaich (eds.), Plenum, New York, pp. 91-103.
(64) 	Zamora, P.O. et al. (1983), Evaluation of an exposure system using cells grown on
collagen gels for detecting highly volatile mutagens in the CHO/HGPRT mutation assay,
Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol. 5/6, pp. 795-801.

-- 23 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
23
(65) 	Asakura, M. et al. (2008), An improved system for exposure of cultured mammalian
cells to gaseous compounds in the chromosomal aberration assay, Mutation Research,
Vol. 652/2, pp. 122-130.
(66) 	Fenech, 	M. 	(1993), 	The 	cytokinesis-block 	micronucleus 	technique: 	a 	detailed
description of the method and its application to genotoxicity studies in human populations,
Mutation Research, Vol. 285/1, pp. 35-44.
(67) 	Phelps, 	J.B., M.L. Garriott, W.P. 	Hoffman (2002), A protocol for the in vitro
micronucleus test. II. Contributions to the validation of a protocol suitable for regulatory
submissions from an examination of 10 chemicals with different mechanisms of action
and different levels of activity, Mutation Research, Vol. 521/1-2, pp. 103-112.
(68) 	Kirsch-Volders, M. et al. (2004), Corrigendum to "Report from the in vitro micronucleus
assay working group", Mutation Research, 564, 97-100.
(69) 	Lorge, E. et al. (2008), Comparison of different methods for an accurate assessment
of cytotoxicity in the in vitro micronucleus test. I. Theoretical aspects, Mutation Research,
Vol. 655/1-2, pp. 1-3.
(70) 	Surralles, J. et al. (1995), Induction of micronuclei by five pyrethroid insecticides in
whole-blood and isolated human lymphocyte cultures, Mutation Research, Vol. 341/3, pp.
169-184.
(71) 	Honma, M. (2011), Cytotoxicity measurement in in vitro chromosome aberration test
and micronucleus test, Mutation Research, Vol. 724, pp. 86-87.
(72) 	Pfuhler, S. et al. (2011), In vitro genotoxicity test approaches with better predictivity:
Summary of an IWGT workshop, Mutation Research, Vol. 723/2, pp. 101-107.
(73) 	OECD (2014) Document supporting the WNT decision to implement revised criteria for
the selection of the top concentration in the in vitro mammalian cell assays on genotoxicity
(Test Guidelines 473, 476 and 487) ENV/JM/TG(2014)17. Available upon request.
(74) 	Morita T., M. Honma, K. Morikawa (2012), Effect of reducing the top concentration
used in the in vitro chromosomal aberration test in CHL cells on the evaluation of industrial
chemical genotoxicity, Mutation Research, Vol. 741, pp. 32-56.
(75) 	Brookmire L., J.J. Chen, D.D. Levy (2013), Evaluation of the Highest Concentrations
Used in the In Vitro Chromosome Aberrations Assay, Environmental and Molecular
Mutagenesis, Vol. 54/1, pp. 36-43.
(76) 	EPA, Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention (2011), Chemical Substances
of Unknown or Variable Composition, Complex Reaction Products and Biological
Materials: UVCB Substances, http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/newchems/pubs/uvcb.txt.
(77) 	Sobol, Z. et al. (2012), Development and validation of an in vitro micronucleus assay
platform in TK6 cells, Mutation Research, Vol.746/1, pp. 29-34.

-- 24 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
24
(78) 	Hayashi, M., T. Sofuni, M. Jr. Ishidate (1983), An Application of Acridine Orange
Fluorescent Staining to the Micronucleus Test, Mutation Research, Vol. 120/4, pp. 241-
247.
(79) 	MacGregor, J. T., C.M. Wehr, R.G. Langlois (1983), A Simple Fluorescent Staining
Procedure for Micronuclei and RNA in Erythrocytes Using Hoechst 33258 and Pyronin Y,
Mutation Research, Vol. 120/4, pp. 269-275.
(80) 	Bryce, S.M. et al. (2011), Miniaturized flow cytometry-based CHO-K1 micronucleus
assay discriminates aneugenic and clastogenic modes of action, Environmental and
Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 52/4, pp. 280–286.
(81) 	Nicolette, J. et al. (2011), In vitro micronucleus screening of pharmaceutical candidates
by 	flow 	cytometry 	in 	Chinese 	hamster 	V79 	cells, 	Environmental 	and 	Molecular
Mutagenesis, Vol. 52/5, pp. 355–362.
(82) 	Shi, J., R. Bezabhie, A. Szkudlinska (2010), Further evaluation of a flow cytometric in
vitro micronucleus assay in CHO-K1 cells: a reliable platform that detects micronuclei and
discriminates apoptotic bodies, Mutagenesis, Vol. 25/1, pp. 33-40.
(83) 	OECD (2014), “Statistical analysis supporting the revision of the genotoxicity Test
Guidelines”, OECD Environment, Health and Safety Publications (EHS), Series on testing
and assessment, No.198, OECD Publishing, Paris.
(84) 	Fenech, M. et al. (2003), HUMN project: detailed description of the scoring criteria for
the cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay using isolated human lymphocyte cultures,
Mutation Research, Vol. 534/1-2, pp. 65-75.
(85) 	Elhajouji, 	A., 	M. 	Cunha,M. 	Kirsch-Volders(1998), 	Spindle 	poisons 	can 	induce
polyploidy by mitotic slippage and micronucleate mononucleates in the cytokinesis-block
assay, Mutagenesis, Vol. 13/2, pp. 193-8.
(86) 	Kirsch-Volders, M. et al. (2011), The in vitro MN assay in 2011: origin and fate,
biological significance, protocols, high throughput methodologies and toxicological
relevance, Archives of Toxicology, Vol. 85/8, pp. 873-99.
(87) 	Hayashi, M. et al. (2010), Compilation and use of genetic toxicity historical control
Data, Mutation Research/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis, Vol.723/2,
pp. 87-90.
(88) 	Ryan, T. P. (2000), Statistical Methods for Quality Improvement, 2nd ed., John Wiley
and Sons, New York.
(89) 	Hoffman, 	W.P., 	M.L. 	Garriott, 	C. 	Lee 	(2003), 	“In 	vitro 	micronucleus 	test’, 	in
Encyclopedia of Biopharmaceutical Statistics, 2nd ed., Chow, S. (ed.), Marcel Dekker,
Inc. New York, pp. 463-467.
(90) 	Fleiss, J. L., B. Levin, M.C. Paik (2003), Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions,
3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York.

-- 25 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
25
(91) 	Galloway, S.M. et al. (1987), Chromosome aberration and sister chromatid exchanges
in Chinese hamster ovary cells: Evaluation of 108 chemicals, Environmental and
Molecular Mutagenesis, Vol. 10/suppl. 10, pp. 1-175.
(92) 	Richardson, C. et al. (1989), “Analysis of Data from In Vitro Cytogenetic Assays”, in
Statistical Evaluation of Mutagenicity Test Data, Kirkland, D.J. (ed), Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 141-154.
(93) 	International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Guidance S2 (R1) on Genotoxicity
Testing and Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended For Human Use.

-- 26 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
26
ANNEX 1
DEFINITIONS
Aneugen: any substance or process that, by interacting with the components of the mitotic and
meiotic cell division cycle apparatus, leads to aneuploidy in cells or organisms.
Aneuploidy: any deviation from the normal diploid (or haploid) number of chromosomes by a
single chromosome or more than one, but not by entire set(s) of chromosomes (polyploidy).
Apoptosis: programmed cell death characterized by a series of steps leading to the disintegration
of cells into membrane-bound particles that are then eliminated by phagocytosis or by shedding.
Cell proliferation: the increase in cell number as a result of mitotic cell division.
Centromere: the DNA region of a chromosome where both chromatids are held together and on
which both kinetochores are attached side-to-side.
Concentrations: refer to final concentrations of the test chemical in the culture medium.
Clastogen: any substance or event which causes structural chromosomal aberrations in
populations of cells or eukaryotic organisms.
Cytokinesis: the process of cell division immediately following mitosis to form two daughter cells,
each containing a single nucleus.
Cytokinesis-Block Proliferation index (CBPI): the average number of nuclei per cell, which may
be used to estimate cytotoxicity (see Annex 2 for formula).
Cytostasis: inhibition of cell proliferation.
Cytotoxicity: a general term for describing adverse effects to cells e.g. cell death, inhibition of cell
proliferation (cytostasis). The formulas for estimating cytotoxicity are described in Annex 2.
Genotoxic: a general term encompassing all types of DNA or chromosome damage, including
breaks, deletions, adducts, nucleotides modifications and linkages, rearrangements, gene
mutations, chromosome aberrations, and aneuploidy. Not all types of genotoxic effects result in
mutations or stable chromosome damage.
Interphase cells: cells not in the mitotic stage.
Kinetochore: a protein-containing structure that assembles at the centromere of a chromosome
to which spindle fibres associate during cell division, allowing orderly movement of daughter
chromosomes to the poles of the daughter cells.
Micronuclei: small nuclei, separate from and additional to the main nuclei of cells, produced
during 	telophase 	of 	mitosis 	or 	meiosis 	by 	lagging 	chromosome 	fragments 	or 	whole

-- 27 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
27
chromosomes.
Mitosis: division of the cell nucleus usually divided into prophase, prometaphase, metaphase,
anaphase and telophase.
Mitotic index: the ratio of cells in metaphase divided by the total number of cells observed in a
population of cells; an indication of the degree of cell proliferation of that population.
Mutagenic: produces a heritable change of DNA base-pair sequences(s) in genes or of the
structure of chromosomes (chromosome aberrations).
Non-disjunction: failure of paired chromatids to disjoin and properly segregate to the developing
daughter cells, resulting in daughter cells with abnormal numbers of chromosomes.
p53 status: p53 protein is involved in cell cycle regulation, apoptosis and DNA repair. Cells
deficient in functional p53 protein, unable to arrest cell cycle or to eliminate damaged cells via
apoptosis or other mechanisms (e.g. induction of DNA repair) related to p53 functions in
response to DNA damage, should be theoretically more prone to gene mutations or chromosomal
aberrations.
Polyploidy: numerical chromosome aberrations in cells or organisms involving entire set(s) of
chromosomes, as opposed to an individual chromosome or chromosomes (aneuploidy).
Proliferation Index (PI): an indication of cell proliferation determined by counting the number of
clones consisting of one, two, three to four or five to eight cells. It is a useful additional parameter
for confirming cell proliferation has occurred in cell lines tested in the absence of cytoB.
Relative Increase in Cell Count (RICC): parameter to estimate cytotoxicity when cytoB is not
used (see Annex 2 for formula).
Relative Population Doubling (RPD): parameter to estimate cytotoxicity when cytoB is not used
(see Annex 2 for formula).
Replication Index (RI): 	the proportion of cell division cycles completed in a treated culture,
relative to the untreated control, during the exposure period and recovery (see Annex 2 for
formula).
S9 liver fraction: supernatant of liver homogenate after 9000g centrifugation, i.e. raw liver extract.
S9 mix: mix of the S9 liver fraction and cofactors necessary for metabolic enzyme activity.
Solvent control: General term to define the control cultures receiving the solvent alone used to
dissolve the test chemical.
Untreated control: cultures that receive no treatment (i.e. no test chemical nor solvent) but are
processed concurrently in the same way as the cultures receiving the test chemical.

-- 28 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
28
ANNEX 2
FORMULAS TO ESTIMATE CYTOTOXICITY
Parameters of cell proliferation, cytostasis and cytotoxicity are all interrelated. Changes in cell
proliferation parameters in treated cultures relative to concurrent negative controls can be used
as surrogate estimates for cytotoxicity using the formulas described below. Each of these
parameters is different in terms of the contribution made by cytostasis or other forms of
cytotoxicity to the calculations. However, for consistency with the rest of TG487 and for ease of
understanding, the term cytotoxicity has been used to describe the final calculation, irrespective
of the starting parameter.
1. 	With cyto B
When cytoB is used, estimates of cytotoxicity should be based on the Cytokinesis-Block
Proliferation Index (CBPI) or Replication Index (RI) (17) (69). The result obtained from the
final calculation of cytotoxicity is the same, regardless of whether CBPI or RI are used.
• 	The 	CBPI 	indicates 	the 	average 	number 	of 	nuclei 	per 	cell. 	The 	inclusion 	of
mononucleates in the calculation accounts for cytostasis and therefore, CBPI gives an
estimate of cell proliferation. CBPI for the Treated cells and CBPI for the Controls are
calculated separately.
Formula:
CBPI = [Number of mononucleate cells] + 2×[Number of binucleate cells] + 3×[Number of multinucleate cells]
[Total number of cells]
Cytotoxicity estimate:
% Cytotoxicity = 100 − 100 × CBPIT − 1
CBPI C − 1
where
T = test chemical treated cultures
C = control cultures
• 	The RI indicates the relative number of cell cycles per cell during the period of exposure
to cytoB in treated cultures compared to control cultures:
Formula:
RI =
[Number of binucleate cells]T + 2×[Number of multinucleate cells] T
[Total number of cells]T
[Number of binucleate cells]C + 2×[Number of multinucleate cells] C
[Total number of cells] C
× 100
where
T= test chemical treated cultures
C= control cultures

-- 29 of 30 --

OECD/OCDE 	487
© OECD, (2023)
29
Cytotoxicity estimate:
% Cytotoxicity = 100-RI
2. 	Without cytoB
When cytoB is not used, estimates of cytotoxicity should be based on Relative Increase in
Cell Counts (RICC) or on Relative Population Doubling (RPD) as both take into account the
proportion of the cell population which has divided (69). The result obtained from the final
calculation of cytotoxicity is not necessarily the same, depending on whether RICC or RPD is
used.
• 	Relative Increase in Cell Counts (RICC)
Formula:
RICC = [Final number of cells]T − [Starting number of cells] T
[Final number of cells]C − [Starting number of cells]C
× 100
Cytotoxicity estimate:
% Cytotoxicity = 100 - RICC
• 	Relative Population Doubling (RPD)
Formula:
RPD = [Number of population doublings] T
[Number of population doublings] C
× 100
where:
Number of population doublings = 1
log 10 2 × log10
[Final number of cells]
[Starting number of cells]
Cytotoxicity estimate:
% Cytotoxicity = 100 - RPD
Additional comments
In all cases, the number of cells before treatment should be the same for treated and negative
control cultures.
When using automated scoring systems, for instance flow cytometry, laser scanning cytometry
or image analysis, the number of cells in the formula can be substituted by the number of nuclei.
In the negative control cultures, the cell proliferation parameter(s)should be compatible with the
requirement to sample cells after treatment at a time equivalent to about 1.5 – 2.0 normal cell
cycle.

-- 30 of 30 --

